
Kullback–Leibler divergence

Toggle the table of contents



 17

languages

Article

Talk

Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

In mathematical statistics, the Kullback–Leibler divergence (also called relative entropy and I-divergence[1]), denoted 

,

is a type of statistical distance: a measure of how one probability distribution P is different from a second, reference probability

distribution Q.[2][3] A simple interpretation of the KL divergence of P from Q is the expected excess surprise from using Q as a model

when the actual distribution is P. While it is a distance, it is not a metric, the most familiar type of distance: it is not symmetric in the two

distributions (in contrast to variation of information), and does not satisfy the triangle inequality. Instead, in terms of information

geometry, it is a type of divergence,[4] a generalization of squared distance, and for certain classes of distributions (notably an

exponential family), it satisfies a generalized Pythagorean theorem (which applies to squared distances).[5]

In the simple case, a relative entropy of 0 indicates that the two distributions in question have identical quantities of information.

Relative entropy is a nonnegative function of two distributions or measures. It has diverse applications, both theoretical, such as

characterizing the relative (Shannon) entropy in information systems, randomness in continuous time-series, and information gain

when comparing statistical models of inference; and practical, such as applied statistics, fluid mechanics, neuroscience and

bioinformatics.

Introduction and context [edit]

Consider two probability distributions  and . Usually,  represents the data, the observations, or a measured probability distribution.

Distribution  represents instead a theory, a model, a description or an approximation of . The Kullback–Leibler divergence is then

interpreted as the average difference of the number of bits required for encoding samples of  using a code optimized for  rather than

one optimized for . Note that the roles of  and  can be reversed in some situations where that is easier to compute, such as with the

Expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm and Evidence lower bound (ELBO) computations.

Etymology [edit]

The relative entropy was introduced by Solomon Kullback and Richard Leibler in Kullback &amp; Leibler (1951) as "the mean information

for discrimination between  and  per observation from ",[6] where one is comparing two probability measures 

, and 

 are the

hypotheses that one is selecting from measure 

 (respectively). They denoted this by 

, and defined the "'divergence' between 

and " as the symmetrized quantity 

, which had already been defined and used by Harold Jeffreys in 1948.[7] In

Kullback (1959), the symmetrized form is again referred to as the "divergence", and the relative entropies in each direction are

referred to as a "directed divergences" between two distributions;[8] Kullback preferred the term discrimination information.[9] The

term "divergence" is in contrast to a distance (metric), since the symmetrized divergence does not satisfy the triangle inequality.[10]

Numerous references to earlier uses of the symmetrized divergence and to other statistical distances are given in Kullback (1959,

pp. 6–7, 1.3 Divergence). The asymmetric "directed divergence" has come to be known as the Kullback–Leibler divergence, while the

symmetrized "divergence" is now referred to as the Jeffreys divergence.

Definition [edit]

For discrete probability distributions  and  defined on the same sample space, , the relative entropy from  to  is defined[11] to be

which is equivalent to

In other words, it is the expectation of the logarithmic difference between the probabilities  and , where the expectation is taken using

the probabilities .

Relative entropy is only defined in this way if, for all , 

 implies 

 (absolute continuity). Otherwise, it is often defined as 

,[1]

but the value 

 is possible even if 

 everywhere,[12][13] provided that  is infinite. Analogous comments apply to the continuous

and general measure cases defined below.








Whenever 

 is zero the contribution of the corresponding term is interpreted as zero because

For distributions  and  of a continuous random variable, relative entropy is defined to be the integral:[14]

where  and  denote the probability densities of  and .

More generally, if  and  are probability measures on a measurable space , and  is absolutely continuous with respect to , then the

relative entropy from  to  is defined as

where 

 is the Radon–Nikodym derivative of  with respect to ,ie. the unique -almost everywhere defined function  on  such that 

 which exists because  is absolutely continuous with respect to . Also we assume the expression on the right-hand side

exists. Equivalently (by the chain rule), this can be written as

which is the entropy of  relative to . Continuing in this case, if  is any measure on  for which densities  and  with 

 and 

 exist (meaning that  and  are both absolutely continuous with respect to ), then the relative entropy from  to  is given

as

Note that such a measure  for which densities can be defined always exists, since one can take 

 although in practice it will

usually be one that in the context like counting measure for discrete distributions, or Lebesgue measure or a convenient variant

thereof like Gaussian measure or the uniform measure on the sphere, Haar measure on a Lie group etc. for continuous distributions.

The logarithms in these formulae are usually taken to base 2 if information is measured in units of bits, or to base  if information is

measured in nats. Most formulas involving relative entropy hold regardless of the base of the logarithm.

Various conventions exist for referring to 

 in words. Often it is referred to as the divergence between  and , but this fails to

convey the fundamental asymmetry in the relation. Sometimes, as in this article, it may be described as the divergence of  from  or

as the divergence from to . This reflects the asymmetry in Bayesian inference, which starts from a prior  and updates to the

posterior . Another common way to refer to 

 is as the relative entropy of  with respect to  or the information gain from  over 

.

Basic example [edit]

Kullback[3] gives the following example (Table 2.1, Example 2.1). Let P and Q be the distributions shown in the table and figure. P is

the distribution on the left side of the figure, a binomial distribution with 

 and 

. Q is the distribution on the right side of the

figure, a discrete uniform distribution with the three possible outcomes 

 0, 1, 2 (i.e. 

), each with probability 

.



Two distributions to illustrate relative entropy

0

1

2

Distribution 

Distribution 

Relative entropies 

 and 

 are calculated as follows. This example uses the natural log with base e, designated ln to get

results in nats (see units of information).




Illustration of the relative entropy for two normal

Interpretations [edit]

Statistics [edit]

In the field of statistics the Neyman-Pearson lemma states that the most powerful way to distinguish between the two distributions  and

 based on an observation  (drawn from one of them) is through the log of the ratio of their likelihoods: 

. The KL

divergence is the expected value of this statistic if  is actually drawn from . Kullback motivated the statistic as an expected log

likelihood ratio.[15]

Coding [edit]

In the context of coding theory, 

 can be constructed by measuring the expected number of extra bits required to code samples

from  using a code optimized for  rather than the code optimized for .

Inference [edit]

In the context of machine learning, 

 is often called the information gain achieved if  would be used instead of  which is

currently used. By analogy with information theory, it is called the relative entropy of  with respect to .

Expressed in the language of Bayesian inference, 

 is a measure of the information gained by revising one's beliefs from the

prior probability distribution  to the posterior probability distribution . In other words, it is the amount of information lost when  is used

to approximate .[16]

Information geometry [edit]

In applications,  typically represents the "true" distribution of data, observations, or a precisely calculated theoretical distribution, while

 typically represents a theory, model, description, or approximation of . In order to find a distribution  that is closest to , we can

minimize the KL divergence and compute an information projection.

While it is a statistical distance, it is not a metric, the most familiar type of distance, but instead it is a divergence.[4] While metrics are

symmetric and generalize linear distance, satisfying the triangle inequality, divergences are asymmetric and generalize squared

distance, in some cases satisfying a generalized Pythagorean theorem. In general 

 does not equal 

, and the asymmetry

is an important part of the geometry.[4] The infinitesimal form of relative entropy, specifically its Hessian, gives a metric tensor that

equals the Fisher information metric; see § Fisher information metric. Relative entropy satisfies a generalized Pythagorean theorem for

exponential families (geometrically interpreted as dually flat manifolds), and this allows one to minimize relative entropy by geometric

means, for example by information projection and in maximum likelihood estimation.[5]

Relative entropy is a special case of a broader class of statistical divergences called f-divergences as well as the class of Bregman

divergences, and it is the only such divergence over probabilities that is a member of both classes.

Finance (game theory)

[edit]

Consider a growth-optimizing investor in a fair game with mutually exclusive outcomes (e.g. a “horse race” in which the official odds add

up to one). The rate of return expected by such an investor is equal to the relative entropy between the investor’s believed

probabilities and the official odds.[17] This is a special case of a much more general connection between financial returns and

divergence measures.[18]

Motivation [edit]

In information theory, the Kraft–McMillan theorem establishes that any directly

decodable coding scheme for coding a message to identify one value  out of

a set of possibilities  can be seen as representing an implicit probability

distribution 

 over , where  is the length of the code for  in bits.

Therefore, relative entropy can be interpreted as the expected extra message-

length per datum that must be communicated if a code that is optimal for a

given (wrong) distribution  is used, compared to using a code based on the

true distribution : it is the excess entropy.

where 

 is the cross entropy of  and , and 

 is the entropy of  (which is


distributions. The typical asymmetry is clearly visible.

the same as the cross-entropy of P with itself).

The relative entropy 

 can be thought of geometrically as a statistical

distance, a measure of how far the distribution Q is from the distribution P. Geometrically it is a divergence: an asymmetric, generalized

form of squared distance. The cross-entropy 

 is itself such a measurement (formally a loss function), but it cannot be thought of

as a distance, since 

 isn't zero. This can be fixed by subtracting 

 to make 

 agree more closely with our notion of

distance, as the excess loss. The resulting function is asymmetric, and while this can be symmetrized (see § Symmetrised divergence),

the asymmetric form is more useful. See § Interpretations for more on the geometric interpretation.

Relative entropy relates to "rate function" in the theory of large deviations.[19][20]

Arthur Hobson proved that relative entropy is the only measure of difference between probability distributions that satisfies some

desired properties, which are the canonical extension to those appearing in a commonly used characterization of entropy.[21]

Consequently, mutual information is the only measure of mutual dependence that obeys certain related conditions, since it can be

defined in terms of Kullback–Leibler divergence.

Properties [edit]

Relative entropy is always non-negative,

a result known as Gibbs' inequality, with 

 equals zero if and only if 

 as measures.

In particular, if 

 and 

, then 

 -almost everywhere. The entropy 

 thus sets a minimum value for the

cross-entropy 

, the expected number of bits required when using a code based on  rather than ; and the Kullback–Leibler

divergence therefore represents the expected number of extra bits that must be transmitted to identify a value  drawn from , if a code

is used corresponding to the probability distribution , rather than the "true" distribution .

No upper-bound exists for the general case. However, it is shown that if  and  are two discrete probability distributions built by

distributing the same discrete quantity, then the maximum value of 

 can be calculated.[22]

Relative entropy remains well-defined for continuous distributions, and furthermore is invariant under parameter transformations.

For example, if a transformation is made from variable  to variable 

, then, since 

 and 

 where 

 is the absolute value of the derivative or more generally of the Jacobian, the relative

entropy may be rewritten:

where 

 and 

. Although it was assumed that the transformation was continuous, this need not be the case. This also

shows that the relative entropy produces a dimensionally consistent quantity, since if  is a dimensioned variable, 

 and 

 are

also dimensioned, since e.g. 

 is dimensionless. The argument of the logarithmic term is and remains dimensionless, as it

must. It can therefore be seen as in some ways a more fundamental quantity than some other properties in information theory[23]

(such as self-information or Shannon entropy), which can become undefined or negative for non-discrete probabilities.

Relative entropy is additive for independent distributions in much the same way as Shannon entropy. If 

 are independent

distributions, and 

, and likewise 

 for independent distributions 

 then

Relative entropy 

 is convex in the pair of probability measures 

, i.e. if 

 and 

 are two pairs of probability

measures then

Duality formula for variational inference [edit]

The following result, due to Donsker and Varadhan,[24] is known as Donsker and Varadhan's variational formula.

Theorem [Duality Formula for Variational Inference] — Let  be a set endowed with an appropriate -field , and two probability

measures  and , which formulate two probability spaces 

 and 

 with 

. (

 indicates that  is absolutely continuous

with respect to .) Let  be a real-valued integrable random variable on 

. Then the following equality holds

Further, the supremum on the right-hand side is attained if and only if it holds

almost surely with respect to probability measure , where 

 denotes the Radon-Nikodym derivative of  with respect to  .


Proof

For a short proof assuming integrability of 

 with respect to , let  have -density 

, i.e. 

 Then





Therefore,

where the last inequality follows from 

, for which equality occurs if and only if 

. The conclusion follows.

For alternative proof using measure theory, see.[25]

Examples [edit]

Multivariate normal distributions [edit]

Suppose that we have two multivariate normal distributions, with means 

 and with (non-singular) covariance matrices 

 If the two

distributions have the same dimension, , then the relative entropy between the distributions is as follows:[26]

The logarithm in the last term must be taken to base e since all terms apart from the last are base-e logarithms of expressions that are

either factors of the density function or otherwise arise naturally. The equation therefore gives a result measured in nats. Dividing the

entire expression above by 

 yields the divergence in bits.

In a numerical implementation, it is helpful to express the result in terms of the Cholesky decompositions 

 such that 

 and 

. Then with  and  solutions to the triangular linear systems 

, and 

,

A special case, and a common quantity in variational inference, is the relative entropy between a diagonal multivariate normal, and a

standard normal distribution (with zero mean and unit variance):

For two univariate normal distributions p and q the above simplifies to[27]

In the case of co-centered normal distributions with 

, this simplifies[28] to:

Uniform distributions [edit]

Consider two uniform distributions, with the support of one (

) enclosed within the other (

). Then the information gain is:

Intuitively,[28] the information gain to a  times narrower uniform distribution contains 

 bits. This connects with the use of bits in

computing, where  bits would be needed to identify one element of a  long stream.

Relation to metrics [edit]

While relative entropy is a statistical distance, it is not a metric on the space of probability distributions, but instead it is a divergence.[4]

While metrics are symmetric and generalize linear distance, satisfying the triangle inequality, divergences are asymmetric in general

and generalize squared distance, in some cases satisfying a generalized Pythagorean theorem. In general 

 does not equal 

, and while this can be symmetrized (see § Symmetrised divergence), the asymmetry is an important part of the geometry.[4]

It generates a topology on the space of probability distributions. More concretely, if 

 is a sequence of distributions such that

then it is said that

Pinsker's inequality entails that

where the latter stands for the usual convergence in total variation.


Fisher information metric [edit]

Relative entropy is directly related to the Fisher information metric. This can be made explicit as follows. Assume that the probability

distributions  and  are both parameterized by some (possibly multi-dimensional) parameter . Consider then two close by values of 

 and 

 so that the parameter  differs by only a small amount from the parameter value . Specifically, up to first order one

has (using the Einstein summation convention)

with 

 a small change of  in the  direction, and 

 the corresponding rate of change in the probability distribution.

Since relative entropy has an absolute minimum 0 for 

, i.e. 

, it changes only to second order in the small parameters 

. More

formally, as for any minimum, the first derivatives of the divergence vanish

and by the Taylor expansion one has up to second order

where the Hessian matrix of the divergence

must be positive semidefinite. Letting  vary (and dropping the subindex 0) the Hessian 

 defines a (possibly degenerate)

Riemannian metric on the θ parameter space, called the Fisher information metric.

Fisher information metric theorem [edit]

When 

 satisfies the following regularity conditions:

 exist,





where ξ is independent of ρ

then:

Variation of information [edit]

Another information-theoretic metric is variation of information, which is roughly a symmetrization of conditional entropy. It is a metric on

the set of partitions of a discrete probability space.

Relation to other quantities of information theory [edit]

Many of the other quantities of information theory can be interpreted as applications of relative entropy to specific cases.

Self-information [edit]

Main article: Information content

The self-information, also known as the information content of a signal, random variable, or event is defined as the negative logarithm

of the probability of the given outcome occurring.

When applied to a discrete random variable, the self-information can be represented as[citation needed]

is the relative entropy of the probability distribution 

 from a Kronecker delta representing certainty that 

 — i.e. the number of

extra bits that must be transmitted to identify  if only the probability distribution 

 is available to the receiver, not the fact that 

.

Mutual information [edit]

The mutual information,

is the relative entropy of the product 

 of the two marginal probability distributions from the joint probability distribution 

 —

i.e. the expected number of extra bits that must be transmitted to identify  and  if they are coded using only their marginal


distributions instead of the joint distribution. Equivalently, if the joint probability 

 is known, it is the expected number of extra bits

that must on average be sent to identify  if the value of  is not already known to the receiver.

Shannon entropy [edit]

The Shannon entropy,

is the number of bits which would have to be transmitted to identify  from  equally likely possibilities, less the relative entropy of the

uniform distribution on the random variates of , 

, from the true distribution 

 — i.e. less the expected number of bits saved,

which would have had to be sent if the value of  were coded according to the uniform distribution 

 rather than the true distribution 

. This definition of Shannon entropy forms the basis of E.T. Jaynes's alternative generalization to continuous distributions, the

limiting density of discrete points (as opposed to the usual differential entropy), which defines the continuous entropy as

which is equivalent to:

Conditional entropy [edit]

The conditional entropy[29],

is the number of bits which would have to be transmitted to identify  from  equally likely possibilities, less the relative entropy of the

product distribution 

 from the true joint distribution 

 — i.e. less the expected number of bits saved which would have had to

be sent if the value of  were coded according to the uniform distribution 

 rather than the conditional distribution 

 of  given .

Cross entropy [edit]

When we have a set of possible events, coming from the distribution p, we can encode them (with a lossless data compression) using

entropy encoding. This compresses the data by replacing each fixed-length input symbol with a corresponding unique, variable-length,

prefix-free code (e.g.: the events (A, B, C) with probabilities p = (1/2, 1/4, 1/4) can be encoded as the bits (0, 10, 11)). If we know the

distribution p in advance, we can devise an encoding that would be optimal (e.g.: using Huffman coding). Meaning the messages we

encode will have the shortest length on average (assuming the encoded events are sampled from p), which will be equal to Shannon's

Entropy of p (denoted as 

). However, if we use a different probability distribution (q) when creating the entropy encoding scheme,

then a larger number of bits will be used (on average) to identify an event from a set of possibilities. This new (larger) number is

measured by the cross entropy between p and q.

The cross entropy between two probability distributions (p and q) measures the average number of bits needed to identify an event

from a set of possibilities, if a coding scheme is used based on a given probability distribution q, rather than the "true" distribution p.

The cross entropy for two distributions p and q over the same probability space is thus defined as follows.

For explicit derivation of this, see the Motivation section above.

Under this scenario, relative entropies (kl-divergence) can be interpreted as the extra number of bits, on average, that are needed

(beyond 

) for encoding the events because of using q for constructing the encoding scheme instead of p.

Bayesian updating [edit]

In Bayesian statistics, relative entropy can be used as a measure of the information gain in moving from a prior distribution to a

posterior distribution: 

. If some new fact 

 is discovered, it can be used to update the posterior distribution for  from 

to a new posterior distribution 

 using Bayes' theorem:

This distribution has a new entropy:

which may be less than or greater than the original entropy 

. However, from the standpoint of the new probability distribution

one can estimate that to have used the original code based on 

 instead of a new code based on 

 would have added an

expected number of bits:


to the message length. This therefore represents the amount of useful information, or information gain, about , that has been learned

by discovering 

.

If a further piece of data, 

, subsequently comes in, the probability distribution for  can be updated further, to give a new best

guess 

. If one reinvestigates the information gain for using 

 rather than 

, it turns out that it may be either greater or

less than previously estimated:

 may be ≤ or &gt; than 

and so the combined information gain does not obey the triangle inequality:

 may be &lt;, = or &gt; than 

All one can say is that on average, averaging using 

, the two sides will average out.

Bayesian experimental design [edit]

A common goal in Bayesian experimental design is to maximise the expected relative entropy between the prior and the posterior.[30]

When posteriors are approximated to be Gaussian distributions, a design maximising the expected relative entropy is called Bayes d-

optimal.

Discrimination information [edit]

Relative entropy 

 can also be interpreted as the expected discrimination information for  over : the mean

information per sample for discriminating in favor of a hypothesis  against a hypothesis , when hypothesis  is true.[31] Another

name for this quantity, given to it by I. J. Good, is the expected weight of evidence for  over  to be expected from each sample.

The expected weight of evidence for  over  is not the same as the information gain expected per sample about the probability

distribution 

 of the hypotheses,

Either of the two quantities can be used as a utility function in Bayesian experimental design, to choose an optimal next question to

investigate: but they will in general lead to rather different experimental strategies.

On the entropy scale of information gain there is very little difference between near certainty and absolute certainty—coding according

to a near certainty requires hardly any more bits than coding according to an absolute certainty. On the other hand, on the logit scale

implied by weight of evidence, the difference between the two is enormous – infinite perhaps; this might reflect the difference between

being almost sure (on a probabilistic level) that, say, the Riemann hypothesis is correct, compared to being certain that it is correct

because one has a mathematical proof. These two different scales of loss function for uncertainty are both useful, according to how

well each reflects the particular circumstances of the problem in question.

Principle of minimum discrimination information [edit]

The idea of relative entropy as discrimination information led Kullback to propose the Principle of Minimum Discrimination

Information (MDI): given new facts, a new distribution  should be chosen which is as hard to discriminate from the original distribution

 as possible; so that the new data produces as small an information gain 

 as possible.

For example, if one had a prior distribution 

 over  and , and subsequently learnt the true distribution of  was 

, then the relative

entropy between the new joint distribution for  and , 

, and the earlier prior distribution would be:

i.e. the sum of the relative entropy of 

 the prior distribution for  from the updated distribution 

, plus the expected value (using the

probability distribution 

) of the relative entropy of the prior conditional distribution 

 from the new conditional distribution 

.

(Note that often the later expected value is called the conditional relative entropy (or conditional Kullback-Leibler divergence) and

denoted by 

 [3][29]) This is minimized if 

 over the whole support of 

; and we note that this result

incorporates Bayes' theorem, if the new distribution 

 is in fact a δ function representing certainty that  has one particular value.

MDI can be seen as an extension of Laplace's Principle of Insufficient Reason, and the Principle of Maximum Entropy of E.T. Jaynes. In

particular, it is the natural extension of the principle of maximum entropy from discrete to continuous distributions, for which Shannon

entropy ceases to be so useful (see differential entropy), but the relative entropy continues to be just as relevant.

In the engineering literature, MDI is sometimes called the Principle of Minimum Cross-Entropy (MCE) or Minxent for short.

Minimising relative entropy from  to  with respect to  is equivalent to minimizing the cross-entropy of  and , since

which is appropriate if one is trying to choose an adequate approximation to . However, this is just as often not the task one is trying to

achieve. Instead, just as often it is  that is some fixed prior reference measure, and  that one is attempting to optimise by minimising 

 subject to some constraint. This has led to some ambiguity in the literature, with some authors attempting to resolve the

inconsistency by redefining cross-entropy to be 

, rather than 

[citation needed].




Pressure versus volume plot of

available work from a mole of argon

gas relative to ambient, calculated as 

times the Kullback–Leibler divergence.

Relationship to available work [edit]

Surprisals[32] add where probabilities multiply. The surprisal for an event of probability  is

defined as 

. If  is 

 then surprisal is in nats, bits, or 

 so that, for

instance, there are  bits of surprisal for landing all "heads" on a toss of  coins.

Best-guess states (e.g. for atoms in a gas) are inferred by maximizing the average surprisal 

(entropy) for a given set of control parameters (like pressure  or volume ). This constrained

entropy maximization, both classically[33] and quantum mechanically,[34] minimizes Gibbs

availability in entropy units[35] 

 where  is a constrained multiplicity or partition function.

When temperature  is fixed, free energy (

) is also minimized. Thus if 

 and number of

molecules  are constant, the Helmholtz free energy 

 (where  is energy and  is

entropy) is minimized as a system "equilibrates." If  and  are held constant (say during

processes in your body), the Gibbs free energy 

 is minimized instead. The change

in free energy under these conditions is a measure of available work that might be done in the

process. Thus available work for an ideal gas at constant temperature  and pressure  is 

 where 

 and 

 (see also Gibbs inequality).

More generally[36] the work available relative to some ambient is obtained by multiplying ambient temperature  by relative entropy or

net surprisal 

 defined as the average value of 

 where  is the probability of a given state under ambient conditions. For

instance, the work available in equilibrating a monatomic ideal gas to ambient values of  and  is thus 

, where relative entropy

The resulting contours of constant relative entropy, shown at right for a mole of Argon at standard temperature and pressure, for

example put limits on the conversion of hot to cold as in flame-powered air-conditioning or in the unpowered device to convert boiling-

water to ice-water discussed here.[37] Thus relative entropy measures thermodynamic availability in bits.

Quantum information theory [edit]

For density matrices  and  on a Hilbert space, the quantum relative entropy from  to  is defined to be





In quantum information science the minimum of 

 over all separable states  can also be used as a measure of entanglement in

the state .

Relationship between models and reality [edit]

See also: Maximum likelihood estimation § Relation to minimizing Kullback–Leibler divergence and cross entropy

Further information: Model selection

Just as relative entropy of "actual from ambient" measures thermodynamic availability, relative entropy of "reality from a model" is also

useful even if the only clues we have about reality are some experimental measurements. In the former case relative entropy describes

distance to equilibrium or (when multiplied by ambient temperature) the amount of available work, while in the latter case it tells you

about surprises that reality has up its sleeve or, in other words, how much the model has yet to learn.

Although this tool for evaluating models against systems that are accessible experimentally may be applied in any field, its application

to selecting a statistical model via Akaike information criterion are particularly well described in papers[38] and a book[39] by Burnham

and Anderson. In a nutshell the relative entropy of reality from a model may be estimated, to within a constant additive term, by a

function of the deviations observed between data and the model's predictions (like the mean squared deviation) . Estimates of such

divergence for models that share the same additive term can in turn be used to select among models.

When trying to fit parametrized models to data there are various estimators which attempt to minimize relative entropy, such as

maximum likelihood and maximum spacing estimators.[citation needed]

Symmetrised divergence [edit]

Kullback &amp; Leibler (1951) also considered the symmetrized function:[6]

which they referred to as the "divergence", though today the "KL divergence" refers to the asymmetric function (see § Etymology for

the evolution of the term). This function is symmetric and nonnegative, and had already been defined and used by Harold Jeffreys in

1948;[7] it is accordingly called the Jeffreys divergence.

This quantity has sometimes been used for feature selection in classification problems, where  and  are the conditional pdfs of a

feature under two different classes. In the Banking and Finance industries, this quantity is referred to as Population Stability Index


(PSI), and is used to assess distributional shifts in model features through time.

An alternative is given via the  divergence,





which can be interpreted as the expected information gain about  from discovering which probability distribution  is drawn from,  or 

, if they currently have probabilities  and 

 respectively.[clarification needed][citation needed]

The value 

 gives the Jensen–Shannon divergence, defined by

where  is the average of the two distributions,

 can also be interpreted as the capacity of a noisy information channel with two inputs giving the output distributions  and . The

Jensen–Shannon divergence, like all f-divergences, is locally proportional to the Fisher information metric. It is similar to the Hellinger

metric (in the sense that it induces the same affine connection on a statistical manifold).

Furthermore, the Jensen-Shannon divergence can be generalized using abstract statistical M-mixtures relying on an abstract mean M.

[40] [41]

Relationship to other probability-distance measures [edit]

There are many other important measures of probability distance. Some of these are particularly connected with relative entropy. For

example:

The total variation distance, 

. This is connected to the divergence through Pinsker's inequality:

Pinsker's inequality is vacuous for any distributions where 

, since the total variation distance is at most . For such

distributions, an alternative bound can be used, due to Bretagnolle and Huber[42] (see, also, Tsybakov[43]):

The family of Rényi divergences generalize relative entropy. Depending on the value of a certain parameter, , various inequalities

may be deduced.

Other notable measures of distance include the Hellinger distance, histogram intersection, Chi-squared statistic, quadratic form

distance, match distance, Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance, and earth mover's distance.[44]

Data differencing [edit]

Main article: Data differencing

Just as absolute entropy serves as theoretical background for data compression, relative entropy serves as theoretical background for

data differencing – the absolute entropy of a set of data in this sense being the data required to reconstruct it (minimum compressed

size), while the relative entropy of a target set of data, given a source set of data, is the data required to reconstruct the target given

the source (minimum size of a patch).

See also [edit]

Akaike information criterion

Bayesian information criterion

Bregman divergence

Cross-entropy

Deviance information criterion

Entropic value at risk

Entropy power inequality

Hellinger distance

Information gain in decision trees

Information gain ratio

Information theory and measure theory

Jensen–Shannon divergence

Quantum relative entropy

Solomon Kullback and Richard Leibler


References [edit]

1. ^ a b Csiszar, I (February 1975). "I-Divergence Geometry of Probability Distributions and Minimization Problems" . Ann. Probab. 3 (1): 146–

158. doi:10.1214/aop/1176996454 .

2. ^ Kullback, S.; Leibler, R.A. (1951). "On information and sufficiency" . Annals of Mathematical Statistics. 22 (1): 79–86.

doi:10.1214/aoms/1177729694 . JSTOR 2236703 . MR 0039968 .

3. ^ a b c Kullback 1959.

4. ^ a b c d e Amari 2016, p. 11.

5. ^ a b Amari 2016, p. 28.

6. ^ a b Kullback &amp; Leibler 1951, p. 80.

7. ^ a b Jeffreys 1948, p. 158.

8. ^ Kullback 1959, p. 7.

9. ^ Kullback, S. (1987). "Letter to the Editor: The Kullback–Leibler distance". The American Statistician. 41 (4): 340–341.

doi:10.1080/00031305.1987.10475510 . JSTOR 2684769 .

10. ^ Kullback 1959, p. 6.

11. ^ MacKay, David J.C. (2003). Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms  (First ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 34.

ISBN 9780521642989.

12. ^ "machine learning - What's the maximum value of Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence" . Cross Validated.

13. ^ "integration - In what situations is the integral equal to infinity?" . Mathematics Stack Exchange.

14. ^ Bishop, Christopher M. 1959-. Pattern recognition and machine learning . p. 55. OCLC 1334664824 .

15. ^ Kullback 1959, p. 5.

16. ^ Burnham, K. P.; Anderson, D. R. (2002). Model Selection and Multi-Model Inference  (2nd ed.). Springer. p. 51 . ISBN 9780387953649.

17. ^ Kelly, J. L. Jr. (1956). "A New Interpretation of Information Rate". Bell Syst. Tech. J. 2 (4): 917–926. doi:10.1002/j.1538-

7305.1956.tb03809.x .

18. ^ Soklakov, A. N. (2020). "Economics of Disagreement—Financial Intuition for the Rényi Divergence" . Entropy. 22 (8): 860.

arXiv:1811.08308 . Bibcode:2020Entrp..22..860S . doi:10.3390/e22080860 . PMC 7517462 . PMID 33286632 .

19. ^ Sanov, I.N. (1957). "On the probability of large deviations of random magnitudes". Mat. Sbornik. 42 (84): 11–44.

20. ^ Novak S.Y. (2011), Extreme Value Methods with Applications to Finance ch. 14.5 (Chapman &amp; Hall). ISBN 978-1-4398-3574-6.

21. ^ Hobson, Arthur (1971). Concepts in statistical mechanics. New York: Gordon and Breach. ISBN 978-0677032405.

22. ^ Bonnici, V. (2020). "Kullback-Leibler divergence between quantum distributions, and its upper-bound". arXiv:2008.05932  [cs.LG ].

23. ^ See the section "differential entropy – 4" in Relative Entropy  video lecture by Sergio Verdú NIPS 2009

24. ^ Donsker, Monroe D.; Varadhan, SR Srinivasa (1983). "Asymptotic evaluation of certain Markov process expectations for large time. IV".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics. 36 (2): 183–212. doi:10.1002/cpa.3160360204 .

25. ^ Lee, Se Yoon (2021). "Gibbs sampler and coordinate ascent variational inference: A set-theoretical review". Communications in Statistics

- Theory and Methods. 51 (6): 1549–1568. arXiv:2008.01006 . doi:10.1080/03610926.2021.1921214 . S2CID 220935477 .

26. ^ Duchi J. 



"Derivations for Linear Algebra and Optimization"

 (PDF). p. 13.

27. ^ Belov, Dmitry I.; Armstrong, Ronald D. (2011-04-15). "Distributions of the Kullback-Leibler divergence with applications" . British Journal

of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology. 64 (2): 291–309. doi:10.1348/000711010x522227 . ISSN 0007-1102 . PMID 21492134 .

28. ^ a b Buchner, Johannes (2022-04-29). An intuition for physicists: information gain from experiments . OCLC 1363563215 .

29. ^ a b Cover, Thomas M.; Thomas, Joy A. (1991), Elements of Information Theory, John Wiley &amp; Sons, p. 22

30. ^ Chaloner, K.; Verdinelli, I. (1995). "Bayesian experimental design: a review" . Statistical Science. 10 (3): 273–304.

doi:10.1214/ss/1177009939 .

31. ^ Press, W.H.; Teukolsky, S.A.; Vetterling, W.T.; Flannery, B.P. (2007). "Section 14.7.2. Kullback–Leibler Distance" . Numerical

Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88068-8.

32. ^ Tribus, Myron (1959). Thermostatics and Thermodynamics: An Introduction to Energy, Information and States of Matter, with Engineering

Applications . Van Nostrand.

33. ^ Jaynes, E. T. (1957). 



"Information theory and statistical mechanics"

 (PDF). Physical Review. 106 (4): 620–630.

Bibcode:1957PhRv..106..620J . doi:10.1103/physrev.106.620 .

34. ^ Jaynes, E. T. (1957). 



"Information theory and statistical mechanics II"

 (PDF). Physical Review. 108 (2): 171–190.

Bibcode:1957PhRv..108..171J . doi:10.1103/physrev.108.171 .

35. ^ Gibbs, Josiah Willard (1871). A Method of Geometrical Representation of the Thermodynamic Properties of Substances by Means of

Surfaces . The Academy. footnote page 52.

36. ^ Tribus, M.; McIrvine, E. C. (1971). "Energy and information". Scientific American. 224 (3): 179–186. Bibcode:1971SciAm.225c.179T .

doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0971-179 .

37. ^ Fraundorf, P. (2007). "Thermal roots of correlation-based complexity" . Complexity. 13 (3): 18–26. arXiv:1103.2481 .

Bibcode:2008Cmplx..13c..18F . doi:10.1002/cplx.20195 . S2CID 20794688 . Archived from the original  on 2011-08-13.

38. ^ Burnham, K.P.; Anderson, D.R. (2001). "Kullback–Leibler information as a basis for strong inference in ecological studies" . Wildlife

Research. 28 (2): 111–119. doi:10.1071/WR99107 .

39. ^ Burnham, Kenneth P. Model selection and multimodel inference : a practical information-theoretic approach . ISBN 978-1-4419-2973-0.

OCLC 878132909 .

40. ^ Nielsen, Frank (2019). "On the Jensen–Shannon Symmetrization of Distances Relying on Abstract Means" . Entropy. 21 (5): 485.

arXiv:1904.04017 . Bibcode:2019Entrp..21..485N . doi:10.3390/e21050485 . PMC 7514974 . PMID 33267199 .


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 19 April 2023, at 15:25 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of

Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

41. ^ Nielsen, Frank (2020). "On a Generalization of the Jensen–Shannon Divergence and the Jensen–Shannon Centroid" . Entropy. 22 (2):

221. arXiv:1912.00610 . Bibcode:2020Entrp..22..221N . doi:10.3390/e22020221 . PMC 7516653 . PMID 33285995 .

42. ^ Bretagnolle, J.; Huber, C. (1978), "Estimation des densités : Risque minimax" , Lecture Notes in Mathematics (in French), Berlin,

Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 342–363, doi:10.1007/bfb0064610 , ISBN 978-3-540-08761-8, S2CID 122597694 , retrieved

2023-02-14 Lemma 2.1

43. ^ B.), Tsybakov, A. B. (Alexandre (2010). Introduction to nonparametric estimation . Springer. ISBN 978-1-4419-2709-5.

OCLC 757859245 . Equation 2.25.

44. ^ Rubner, Y.; Tomasi, C.; Guibas, L. J. (2000). "The earth mover's distance as a metric for image retrieval". International Journal of

Computer Vision. 40 (2): 99–121. doi:10.1023/A:1026543900054 . S2CID 14106275 .

Amari, Shun-ichi (2016). Information Geometry and Its Applications. Applied Mathematical Sciences. Vol. 194. Springer Japan. pp. XIII, 374.

doi:10.1007/978-4-431-55978-8 . ISBN 978-4-431-55977-1.

Kullback, Solomon (1959), Information Theory and Statistics, John Wiley &amp; Sons. Republished by Dover Publications in 1968; reprinted in

1978: ISBN 0-8446-5625-9.

Jeffreys, Harold (1948). Theory of Probability (Second ed.). Oxford University Press.

External links [edit]

Information Theoretical Estimators Toolbox

Ruby gem for calculating Kullback–Leibler divergence

Jon Shlens' tutorial on Kullback–Leibler divergence and likelihood theory

Matlab code for calculating Kullback–Leibler divergence for discrete distributions

Sergio Verdú, Relative Entropy

, NIPS 2009. One-hour video lecture.

A modern summary of info-theoretic divergence measures

Categories: Entropy and information

F-divergences

Information geometry

Thermodynamics



