


NLP

What are the Natural Language Processing

Challenges, and How to Fix them?

Natural Language Processing is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence capable of breaking down human

language and feeding the tenets of the same to the intelligent models. Have you planned to use NLP as

your model training technology? Read on to know the challenges and solutions to fix them.

THINKML CONTRIBUTOR

1 JUN 2022 

 6 MIN READ





They say ‘Action speaks louder than Words’. Yet, in some cases, words (precisely deciphered) can determine the

entire course of action relevant to highly intelligent machines and models. This approach to making the words

more meaningful to the machines is NLP or Natural Language Processing.

For the unversed, NLP is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence capable of breaking down human language and

feeding the tenets of the same to the intelligent models. NLP, paired with NLU (Natural Language

Understanding) and NLG (Natural Language Generation), aims at developing highly intelligent and proactive

search engines, grammar checkers, translates, voice assistants, and more.



Log in 

Subscribe

ThinkML






Simply put, NLP breaks down the language complexities, presents the same to machines as data sets to take

reference from, and also extracts the intent and context to develop them further. Yet, implementing them comes

with its share of challenges.






The Art of Asking ChatGPT for High-Quality Answers: A Complete Guide to Prompt Engineering

Techniques

What is NLP: From a Startup’s Perspective?

It is hard for humans to learn a new language, let alone machines. However, if we need machines to help us out

across the day, they need to understand and respond to the human-type of parlance. Natural Language

Processing makes it easy by breaking down the human language into machine-understandable bits, used to train

models to perfection.

Also, NLP has support from NLU, which aims at breaking down the words and sentences from a contextual point

of view. Finally, there is NLG to help machines respond by generating their own version of human language for

two-way communication.






Natural Language Processing with Transformers, Revised Edition

Startups planning to design and develop chatbots, voice assistants, and other interactive tools need to rely on

NLP services and solutions to develop the machines with accurate language and intent deciphering capabilities.

NLP Challenges to Consider

Words can have different meanings. Slangs can be harder to put out contextual. And certain languages are just

hard to feed in, owing to the lack of resources. Despite being one of the more sought-after technologies, NLP

comes with the following rooted and implementation AI challenges.

Lack of Context for Homographs, Homophones, and Homonyms

A ‘Bat’ can be a sporting tool and even a tree-hanging, winged mammal. Despite the spelling being the same, they

differ when meaning and context are concerned. Similarly, ‘There’ and ‘Their’ sound the same yet have different

spellings and meanings to them.

Even humans at times find it hard to understand the subtle differences in usage. Therefore, despite NLP being


Even humans at times find it hard to understand the subtle differences in usage. Therefore, despite NLP being

considered one of the more reliable options to train machines in the language-specific domain, words with

similar spellings, sounds, and pronunciations can throw the context off rather significantly.

Ambiguity

If you think mere words can be confusing, here are is an ambiguous sentence with unclear interpretations.

“I snapped a kid in the mall with my camera”- If the spoken to, it can be the case that the machine gets confused

as to whether the kid was snapped using the camera or when the kid was snapped, he had your camera.

This form of confusion or ambiguity is quite common if you rely on non-credible NLP solutions. As far as

categorization is concerned, ambiguities can be segregated as Syntactic (meaning-based), Lexical (word-based),

and Semantic (context-based).






The ChatGPT GoldRush: Profiting from the AI Revolution Online: Prompt Engineering Mastery

with ChatGPT-4

Errors relevant to Speed and Text

Machines relying on semantic feed cannot be trained if the speech and text bits are erroneous. This issue is

analogous to the involvement of misused or even misspelled words, which can make the model act up over time.

Even though evolved grammar correction tools are good enough to weed out sentence-specific mistakes, the

training data needs to be error-free to facilitate accurate development in the first place.

Inability to Fit in Slangs and Colloquialisms

Even if the NLP services try and scale beyond ambiguities, errors, and homonyms, fitting in slags or culture-

specific verbatim isn’t easy. There are words that lack standard dictionary references but might still be relevant to

a specific audience set. If you plan to design a custom AI-powered voice assistant or model, it is important to fit in

relevant references to make the resource perceptive enough.

One example would be a ‘Big Bang Theory-specific ‘chatbot that understands ‘Buzzinga’ and even responds to the

same.

Apathy towards Vertical-Specific Lingo

Like the culture-specific parlance, certain businesses use highly technical and vertical-specific terminologies that

might not agree with a standard NLP-powered model. Therefore, if you plan on developing field-specific modes

with speech recognition capabilities, the process of entity extraction, training, and data procurement needs to be

highly curated and specific.






Transformers for Natural Language Processing

Lack of Usable Data

NLP hinges on the concepts of sentimental and linguistic analysis of the language, followed by data

procurement, cleansing, labeling, and training. Yet, some languages do not have a lot of usable data or historical

context for the NLP solutions to work around with.

Lack of R&amp;D

NLP implementation isn’t one-dimensional. Instead, it requires assistive technologies like neural networking


NLP implementation isn’t one-dimensional. Instead, it requires assistive technologies like neural networking

and deep learning to evolve into something path-breaking. Adding customized algorithms to specific NLP

implementations is a great way to design custom models—a hack that is often shot down due to the lack of

adequate research and development tools.

Scale Above These Problems, Today: How to Choose the Right

Vendor?

From fixing ambiguity to errors to issues with data collection, it is important to have the right vendor at your

disposal to train and develop the envisioned NLP Model. And while several factors need to be considered, here

are some of the more desirable features to consider while connecting:

Sizable, domain-specific database (audio, speech, and video), regardless of the language.

Capability to implement Part-of-Speech tagging for cutting out ambiguities.

Support for custom assistive technologies like Mulingual Sentence Embeddings to improve the quality of

interpretation.

Seamless data annotation to label data sets as per the requirements.

Multi-lingual database with off-the-shelf picks to work with.

Vendors offering most or even some of these features can be considered for designing your NLP models.






Learning Deep Learning: Theory and Practice of Neural Networks, Computer Vision, Natural

Language Processing, and Transformers Using TensorFlow

Wrap-Up

Needless to say, NLP has evolved into one of the more widely accepted and hailed Artificial Intelligence-powered

technologies. If you are into specifics, the NLP market is expected to grow by almost 1400% by 2025, as

compared to that in 2017. As per expectations and extrapolations, the NLP market will be valued at almost 43

billion by the end of 2025 - Statista

Despite the benefits, Natural Language Processing comes with a few limitations—something that you can address

upon connecting with a reliable AI vendor.

Author

Vatsal Ghiya, founder of Shaip, is an entrepreneur with more than 20 years of experience in healthcare AI

software and services.


MORE IN 

25 Mar 2023 – 14 min read

27 Nov 2022 – 18 min read

8 Nov 2022 – 14 min read

See all 7 posts →

THINKML TEAM 4 JUN 2022 

 11 MIN READ

Free Post

Finding the best and safest cryptocurrency exchange can be complex and confusing for many users. Crypto and Coinbase are

two trading platforms where buyers and sellers conduct monthly or annual transactions. The detailed discussion on Crypto.com

vs Coinbase help you choose what is suitable for you.



Free Post

With the rising popularity of NFTs, artists show great interest in learning how to create an NFT art to earn money. The entire

process of creating these valuable assets is fundamental and straightforward. You don't even need technical knowledge, as NFT

Marketplaces has worked hard to simplify it.


THINKML TEAM 30 MAY 2022 

 12 MIN READ





ThinkML © 2023 

Home 

Signup 

Facebook 

Twitter

Published with Ghost



SHARES

0

