
Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval &gt; Vol 2 &gt; Issue 3



About Us

Alerts

Contact

Ordering Info

Help

Log in

Statistical Language Models for Information Retrieval A Critical Review

By ChengXiang Zhai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, czhai@cs.uiuc.edu

 

Suggested Citation

ChengXiang Zhai (2008), "Statistical Language Models for Information Retrieval A Critical Review", Foundations and Trends® in

Information Retrieval: Vol. 2: No. 3, pp 137-213. http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1500000008 Export

Publication Date: 30 Nov 2008

© 2008 C. Zhai

 

Subjects

Formal models and language models for IR

 

Free Preview:

Download extract

Share

 

 



Journal details

Download article



In this article:

1 Introduction

 

2 The Basic Language Modeling Approach

 

3 Understanding Query Likelihood Scoring

 

4 Improving the Basic Language Modeling Approach

 

5 Query Models and Feedback in Language Models

 

6 Language Models for Special Retrieval Tasks

 

7 Unifying Different Language Models

 

8 Summary and Outlook

 

Acknowledgments

 

References

 

Abstract

Statistical language models have recently been successfully applied to many information retrieval problems. A great deal of recent


Copyright © 2023 now publishers inc.



work has shown that statistical language models not only lead to superior empirical performance, but also facilitate parameter

tuning and open up possibilities for modeling nontraditional retrieval problems. In general, statistical language models provide a

principled way of modeling various kinds of retrieval problems. The purpose of this survey is to systematically and critically review

the existing work in applying statistical language models to information retrieval, summarize their contributions, and point out

outstanding challenges.

DOI:10.1561/1500000008



Book details

ISBN: 978-1-60198-186-8

84 pp. $65.00

Buy book (pb)

 

ISBN: 978-1-60198-187-5

84 pp. $100.00

Buy E-book (.pdf)



Table of contents:

1: Introduction

2: The Basic Language Modeling Approach

3: Understanding Query Likelihood Scoring

4: Improving the Basic Language Modeling Approach

5: Query Models and Feedback in Language Models

6: Language Models for Special Retrieval Tasks

7: Unifying Different Language Models

8: Summary and Outlook

Acknowledgements

References

Statistical Language Models for Information Retrieval

Statistical Language Models for Information Retrieval systematically and critically reviews the existing work in applying statistical

language models to information retrieval, summarizes their contributions, and points out outstanding challenges. Statistical

language models have recently been successfully applied to many information retrieval problems. A great deal of recent work has

shown that statistical language models not only lead to superior empirical performance, but also facilitate parameter tuning and

open up possibilities for modeling non-traditional retrieval problems. In general, statistical language models provide a principled

way of modeling various kinds of retrieval problems. Statistical Language Models for Information Retrieval reviews the development

of this language modeling approach. It surveys a wide range of retrieval models based on language modeling and attempts to

make connections between this new family of models and traditional retrieval models. It summarizes the progress made so far in

these models and point out remaining challenges to be solved to further increase their impact. Statistical Language Models for

Information Retrieval is written for readers who already have some basic knowledge about information retrieval. Some knowledge of

probability and statistics such as the maximum likelihood estimator is helpful, but not a prerequisite to understanding the high-level

discussion.

 




Boston - Delft

