
Python for ML

NumPy

Pandas

OpenCV

Data Analysis

ML Math

NLP

Deep Learning

Data Sciecne

ML Projects

ML Interview Questions



Read

Discuss

Courses

Practice

Video

Information Retrieval (IR) can be defined as a software program that deals with the organization, storage,

retrieval, and evaluation of information from document repositories, particularly textual information. Information

Retrieval is the activity of obtaining material that can usually be documented on an unstructured nature i.e. usually

text which satisfies an information need from within large collections which is stored on computers. For example,

Information Retrieval can be when a user enters a query into the system. 

Not only librarians, professional searchers, etc engage themselves in the activity of information retrieval but

nowadays hundreds of millions of people engage in IR every day when they use web search engines. Information

Retrieval is believed to be the dominant form of Information access. The IR system assists the users in finding the

information they require but it does not explicitly return the answers to the question. It notifies regarding the

existence and location of documents that might consist of the required information. Information retrieval also

extends support to users in browsing or filtering document collection or processing a set of retrieved documents.

The system searches over billions of documents stored on millions of computers. A spam filter, manual or automatic

means are provided by Email program for classifying the mails so that it can be placed directly into particular

folders. 

An IR system has the ability to represent, store, organize, and access information items. A set of keywords are

required to search. Keywords are what people are searching for in search engines. These keywords summarize

What is Information Retrieval?









siddhi2420


the description of the information. 

What is an IR Model?

An Information Retrieval (IR) model selects and ranks the document that is required by the user or the user has

asked for in the form of a query. The documents and the queries are represented in a similar manner, so that

document selection and ranking can be formalized by a matching function that returns a retrieval status value

(RSV) for each document in the collection. Many of the Information Retrieval systems represent document

contents by a set of descriptors, called terms, belonging to a vocabulary V. An IR model determines the query-

document matching function according to four main approaches: 

The estimation of the probability of user’s relevance rel for each document d and query q with respect to a

set R q of training documents: Prob (rel|d, q, R )

Types of IR Models



Components of Information Retrieval/ IR Model

q




Acquisition: In this step, the selection of documents and other objects from various web resources that consist

of text-based documents takes place. The required data is collected by web crawlers and stored in the

database.

Representation: It consists of indexing that contains free-text terms, controlled vocabulary, manual &amp; automatic

techniques as well. example: Abstracting contains summarizing and Bibliographic description that contains

author, title, sources, data, and metadata.

File Organization: There are two types of file organization methods. i.e. Sequential: It contains documents by

document data. Inverted: It contains term by term, list of records under each term. Combination of both.

Query: An IR process starts when a user enters a query into the system. Queries are formal statements of

information needs, for example, search strings in web search engines. In information retrieval, a query does not

uniquely identify a single object in the collection. Instead, several objects may match the query, perhaps with

different degrees of relevancy.

Difference Between Information Retrieval and Data Retrieval


Information Retrieval

Data Retrieval

The software program that deals with the

organization, storage, retrieval, and evaluation

of information from document repositories

particularly textual information.

Data retrieval deals with obtaining data from a database

management system such as ODBMS. It is A process of

identifying and retrieving the data from the database, based on

the query provided by user or application.

Retrieves information about a subject.

Determines the keywords in the user query and retrieves the

data.

Small errors are likely to go unnoticed.

A single error object means total failure.

Not always well structured and is semantically

ambiguous.

Has a well-defined structure and semantics.

Does not provide a solution to the user of the

database system.

Provides solutions to the user of the database system.

The results obtained are approximate

matches.

The results obtained are exact matches.

Results are ordered by relevance.

Results are unordered by relevance.

It is a probabilistic model.

It is a deterministic model.

User Interaction With Information Retrieval System



The User Task: The information first is supposed to be translated into a query by the user. In the information

retrieval system, there is a set of words that convey the semantics of the information that is required whereas, in a

data retrieval system, a query expression is used to convey the constraints which are satisfied by the objects.

Example: A user wants to search for something but ends up searching with another thing. This means that the user

is browsing and not searching. The above figure shows the interaction of the user through different tasks.

Logical View of the Documents: A long time ago, documents were represented through a set of index terms or

keywords. Nowadays, modern computers represent documents by a full set of words which reduces the set of


Similar Reads

1.

Precision and Recall in Information Retrieval

2.

Introductory guide to Information Retrieval using KNN and KDTree

3.

Document Retrieval using Boolean Model and Vector Space Model

4.

Copyright Information

Related Tutorials

1.

Deep Learning Tutorial

2.

Top 101 Machine Learning Projects with Source Code

3.

Machine Learning Mathematics

representative keywords. This can be done by eliminating stopwords i.e. articles and connectives. These

operations are text operations. These text operations reduce the complexity of the document representation from

full text to set of index terms.

Past, Present, and Future of Information Retrieval

1. Early Developments: As there was an increase in the need for a lot of information, it became necessary to

build data structures to get faster access. The index is the data structure for faster retrieval of information. Over

centuries manual categorization of hierarchies was done for indexes. 

2. Information Retrieval In Libraries: Libraries were the first to adopt IR systems for information retrieval. In

first-generation, it consisted, automation of previous technologies, and the search was based on author name and

title. In the second generation, it included searching by subject heading, keywords, etc. In the third generation, it

consisted of graphical interfaces, electronic forms, hypertext features, etc. 

3. The Web and Digital Libraries: It is cheaper than various sources of information, it provides greater access to

networks due to digital communication and it gives free access to publish on a larger medium.

Last Updated : 03 Jul, 2022






Courses

 

course-img



 103k+ interested Geeks

Complete Machine Learning &amp;

Data Science Program

 Beginner to Advance

course-img



 142k+ interested Geeks

4.

Natural Language Processing (NLP) Tutorial

5.

Data Science for Beginners

Previous

Next  

Article Contributed By :

siddhi2420

@siddhi2420

Vote for difficulty

Current difficulty : Easy

 

 

 

 





Easy



Normal



Medium



Hard



Expert

Improved By :

krishna_97

Article Tags :

Machine Learning

Practice Tags :

Machine Learning

Report Issue


 A-143, 9th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower,

Sector-136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh - 201305

 feedback@geeksforgeeks.org



































































































Company

About Us

Careers


In Media

Contact Us

Terms and

Conditions

Privacy Policy

Copyright Policy

Third-Party

Copyright Notices

Advertise with us

Languages

Python

Java

C++

GoLang

SQL

R Language

Android Tutorial

Data Structures

Array

String

Linked List

Stack

Queue

Tree

Graph

Algorithms

Sorting

Searching

Greedy

Dynamic

Programming

Pattern Searching

Recursion

Backtracking

Web

Development

HTML

CSS

JavaScript

Bootstrap

ReactJS


AngularJS

NodeJS

Write &amp; Earn

Write an Article

Improve an Article

Pick Topics to Write

Write Interview

Experience

Internships

Video Internship

Computer

Science

GATE CS Notes

Operating Systems

Computer Network

Database

Management

System

Software

Engineering

Digital Logic Design

Engineering Maths

Data Science &amp;

ML

Data Science With

Python

Data Science For

Beginner

Machine Learning

Tutorial

Maths For Machine

Learning

Pandas Tutorial

NumPy Tutorial

NLP Tutorial

Interview

Corner

Company

Preparation

Preparation for SDE

Company Interview

Corner


Experienced

Interview

Internship Interview

Competitive

Programming

Aptitude

Python

Python Tutorial

Python

Programming

Examples

Django Tutorial

Python Projects

Python Tkinter

OpenCV Python

Tutorial

GfG School

CBSE Notes for

Class 8

CBSE Notes for

Class 9

CBSE Notes for

Class 10

CBSE Notes for

Class 11

CBSE Notes for

Class 12

English Grammar

UPSC/SSC/BANKING

SSC CGL Syllabus

SBI PO Syllabus

IBPS PO Syllabus

UPSC Ethics Notes

UPSC Economics

Notes

UPSC History

Notes

@geeksforgeeks , Some rights reserved

