
Lagrange multiplier

Toggle the table of contents



 29

languages

Article

Talk

Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

In mathematical optimization, the method of Lagrange multipliers is a strategy for finding the local maxima and minima of a function

subject to equality constraints (i.e., subject to the condition that one or more equations have to be satisfied exactly by the chosen

values of the variables).[1] It is named after the mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange. The basic idea is to convert a constrained

problem into a form such that the derivative test of an unconstrained problem can still be applied. The relationship between the

gradient of the function and gradients of the constraints rather naturally leads to a reformulation of the original problem, known as the

Lagrangian function.[2]

The method can be summarized as follows: In order to find the maximum or minimum of a function 

 subjected to the equality

constraint 

 form the Lagrangian function,

and find the stationary points of  considered as a function of  and the Lagrange multiplier  This means that all partial derivatives

should be zero, including the partial derivative with respect to 

[3]

 and 

or equivalently

 and 

The solution corresponding to the original constrained optimization is always a saddle point of the Lagrangian function,[4][5] which can

be identified among the stationary points from the definiteness of the bordered Hessian matrix.[6]

The great advantage of this method is that it allows the optimization to be solved without explicit parameterization in terms of the

constraints. As a result, the method of Lagrange multipliers is widely used to solve challenging constrained optimization problems.

Further, the method of Lagrange multipliers is generalized by the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions, which can also take into account

inequality constraints of the form 

 for a given constant 

Statement [edit]

The following is known as the Lagrange multiplier theorem.[7]

Let 

 be the objective function, 

 be the constraints function, both belonging to  (that is, having continuous first

derivatives). Let 

 be an optimal solution to the following optimization problem such that 

 (here 

 denotes the

matrix of partial derivatives, 

:

Then there exists a unique Lagrange multiplier 

 such that 

The Lagrange multiplier theorem states that at any local maximum (or minimum) of the function evaluated under the equality

constraints, if constraint qualification applies (explained below), then the gradient of the function (at that point) can be expressed as a

linear combination of the gradients of the constraints (at that point), with the Lagrange multipliers acting as coefficients.[8] This is

equivalent to saying that any direction perpendicular to all gradients of the constraints is also perpendicular to the gradient of the

function. Or still, saying that the directional derivative of the function is 0 in every feasible direction.

Single constraint [edit]

For the case of only one constraint and only two choice variables (as exemplified in Figure 1), consider the optimization problem

(Sometimes an additive constant is shown separately rather than being included in , in which case the constraint is written 

 as










Figure 1: The red curve shows the constraint

g(x, y) = c. The blue curves are contours of f(x, y).

The point where the red constraint tangentially

touches a blue contour is the maximum of f(x, y)

along the constraint, since d1 &gt; d2 .

in Figure 1.) We assume that both  and  have continuous first partial

derivatives. We introduce a new variable ( ) called a Lagrange multiplier (or

Lagrange undetermined multiplier) and study the Lagrange function (or

Lagrangian or Lagrangian expression) defined by

where the  term may be either added or subtracted. If 

 is a maximum of 

 for the original constrained problem and 

 then there exists 

 such

that (

) is a stationary point for the Lagrange function (stationary points are

those points where the first partial derivatives of  are zero). The assumption 

 is called constraint qualification. However, not all stationary points yield a

solution of the original problem, as the method of Lagrange multipliers yields only

a necessary condition for optimality in constrained problems.[9][10][11][12][13]

Sufficient conditions for a minimum or maximum also exist, but if a particular

candidate solution satisfies the sufficient conditions, it is only guaranteed that that

solution is the best one locally – that is, it is better than any permissible nearby

points. The global optimum can be found by comparing the values of the original objective function at the points satisfying the

necessary and locally sufficient conditions.

The method of Lagrange multipliers relies on the intuition that at a maximum, f(x, y) cannot be increasing in the direction of any such

neighboring point that also has g = 0. If it were, we could walk along g = 0 to get higher, meaning that the starting point wasn't actually

the maximum. Viewed in this way, it is an exact analogue to testing if the derivative of an unconstrained function is 0, that is, we are

verifying that the directional derivative is 0 in any relevant (viable) direction.

We can visualize contours of f given by f(x, y) = d for various values of d, and the contour of g given by g(x, y) = c.

Suppose we walk along the contour line with g = c . We are interested in finding points where f almost does not change as we walk,

since these points might be maxima.

There are two ways this could happen:

1. We could touch a contour line of f, since by definition f does not change as we walk along its contour lines. This would mean

that the tangents to the contour lines of f and g are parallel here.

2. We have reached a "level" part of f, meaning that f does not change in any direction.

To check the first possibility (we touch a contour line of f), notice that since the gradient of a function is perpendicular to the contour

lines, the tangents to the contour lines of f and g are parallel if and only if the gradients of f and g are parallel. Thus we want points

(x, y) where g(x, y) = c and

for some 

where

are the respective gradients. The constant  is required because although the two gradient vectors are parallel, the magnitudes of the

gradient vectors are generally not equal. This constant is called the Lagrange multiplier. (In some conventions  is preceded by a

minus sign).

Notice that this method also solves the second possibility, that f is level: if f is level, then its gradient is zero, and setting 

 is a

solution regardless of 

.

To incorporate these conditions into one equation, we introduce an auxiliary function

and solve

Note that this amounts to solving three equations in three unknowns. This is the method of Lagrange multipliers.

Note that 

 implies 

 as the partial derivative of  with respect to  is 

 which clearly is zero if and only if 

To summarize

The method generalizes readily to functions on  variables

which amounts to solving n + 1 equations in n + 1 unknowns.




Figure 2: A paraboloid constrained along two

intersecting lines.



Figure 3: Contour map of Figure 2.

The constrained extrema of f are critical points of the Lagrangian , but they are not necessarily local extrema of  (see Example 2

below).

One may reformulate the Lagrangian as a Hamiltonian, in which case the solutions are local minima for the Hamiltonian. This is done in

optimal control theory, in the form of Pontryagin's minimum principle.

The fact that solutions of the Lagrangian are not necessarily extrema also poses difficulties for numerical optimization. This can be

addressed by computing the magnitude of the gradient, as the zeros of the magnitude are necessarily local minima, as illustrated in the

numerical optimization example.

Multiple constraints [edit]

The method of Lagrange multipliers can be extended to solve problems with

multiple constraints using a similar argument. Consider a paraboloid subject to two

line constraints that intersect at a single point. As the only feasible solution, this

point is obviously a constrained extremum. However, the level set of  is clearly

not parallel to either constraint at the intersection point (see Figure 3); instead, it

is a linear combination of the two constraints' gradients. In the case of multiple

constraints, that will be what we seek in general: The method of Lagrange seeks

points not at which the gradient of  is multiple of any single constraint's gradient

necessarily, but in which it is a linear combination of all the constraints' gradients.

Concretely, suppose we have 

 constraints and are walking along the set of

points satisfying 

 Every point  on the contour of a given

constraint function  has a space of allowable directions: the space of vectors

perpendicular to 

 The set of directions that are allowed by all constraints is

thus the space of directions perpendicular to all of the constraints' gradients.

Denote this space of allowable moves by  and denote the span of the

constraints' gradients by 

 Then 

 the space of vectors perpendicular to

every element of 

We are still interested in finding points where  does not change as we walk, since

these points might be (constrained) extrema. We therefore seek  such that any

allowable direction of movement away from  is perpendicular to 

 (otherwise

we could increase  by moving along that allowable direction). In other words, 

 Thus there are scalars 

 such that

These scalars are the Lagrange multipliers. We now have 

 of them, one for

every constraint.

As before, we introduce an auxiliary function

and solve

which amounts to solving 

 equations in 

 unknowns.

The constraint qualification assumption when there are multiple constraints is that the constraint gradients at the relevant point are

linearly independent.

Modern formulation via differentiable manifolds [edit]

The problem of finding the local maxima and minima subject to constraints can be generalized to finding local maxima and minima on a

differentiable manifold 

[14] In what follows, it is not necessary that  be a Euclidean space, or even a Riemannian manifold. All

appearances of the gradient  (which depends on a choice of Riemannian metric) can be replaced with the exterior derivative 

Single constraint

[edit]

Let 

 be a smooth manifold of dimension 

 Suppose that we wish to find the stationary points  of a smooth function 

 when

restricted to the submanifold  defined by 

 where 

 is a smooth function for which 0 is a regular value.

Let 

 and 

 be the exterior derivatives of  and . Stationarity for the restriction 

 at 

 means 

 Equivalently, the kernel

 contains 

 In other words, 

 and 

 are proportional 1-forms. For this it is necessary and sufficient that the

following system of 

 equations holds:


where 

 denotes the exterior product. The stationary points  are the solutions of the above system of equations plus the constraint 

 Note that the 

 equations are not independent, since the left-hand side of the equation belongs to the subvariety of 

 consisting of decomposable elements.

In this formulation, it is not necessary to explicitly find the Lagrange multiplier, a number  such that 

Multiple constraints [edit]

Let 

 and  be as in the above section regarding the case of a single constraint. Rather than the function  described there, now

consider a smooth function 

 with component functions 

 for which 

 is a regular value. Let  be the submanifold

of 

 defined by 

 is a stationary point of 

 if and only if 

 contains 

 For convenience let 

 and 

 where 

 denotes the

tangent map or Jacobian 

 The subspace 

 has dimension smaller than that of 

, namely 

 and 

 

 belongs to 

 if and only if 

 belongs to the image of 

 Computationally speaking, the

condition is that  belongs to the row space of the matrix of 

 or equivalently the column space of the matrix of 

 (the transpose). If 

 denotes the exterior product of the columns of the matrix of 

 the stationary condition for 

 at  becomes

Once again, in this formulation it is not necessary to explicitly find the Lagrange multipliers, the numbers 

 such that

Interpretation of the Lagrange multipliers [edit]

In this section, we modify the constraint equations from the form 

 to the form 

 where the  are m real constants that are

considered to be additional arguments of the Lagrangian expression .

Often the Lagrange multipliers have an interpretation as some quantity of interest. For example, by parametrising the constraint's

contour line, that is, if the Lagrangian expression is

then

So, λk is the rate of change of the quantity being optimized as a function of the constraint parameter. As examples, in Lagrangian

mechanics the equations of motion are derived by finding stationary points of the action, the time integral of the difference between

kinetic and potential energy. Thus, the force on a particle due to a scalar potential, F = −∇V, can be interpreted as a Lagrange

multiplier determining the change in action (transfer of potential to kinetic energy) following a variation in the particle's constrained

trajectory. In control theory this is formulated instead as costate equations.

Moreover, by the envelope theorem the optimal value of a Lagrange multiplier has an interpretation as the marginal effect of the

corresponding constraint constant upon the optimal attainable value of the original objective function: If we denote values at the

optimum with a star ( ), then it can be shown that

For example, in economics the optimal profit to a player is calculated subject to a constrained space of actions, where a Lagrange

multiplier is the change in the optimal value of the objective function (profit) due to the relaxation of a given constraint (e.g. through a

change in income); in such a context 

 is the marginal cost of the constraint, and is referred to as the shadow price.[15]

Sufficient conditions [edit]

Main article: Bordered Hessian

Sufficient conditions for a constrained local maximum or minimum can be stated in terms of a sequence of principal minors

(determinants of upper-left-justified sub-matrices) of the bordered Hessian matrix of second derivatives of the Lagrangian

expression.[6][16]

Examples [edit]

Example 1 [edit]

Suppose we wish to maximize 

 subject to the constraint 

 The feasible set is the unit circle, and the level sets of f are

diagonal lines (with slope −1), so we can see graphically that the maximum occurs at 

 and that the minimum occurs at 




Illustration of the constrained optimization

problem 1



Illustration of the constrained optimization

problem 2

For the method of Lagrange multipliers, the constraint is

hence the Lagrangian function,

is a function that is equivalent to 

 when 

 is set to 0.

Now we can calculate the gradient:

and therefore:

Notice that the last equation is the original constraint.

The first two equations yield

By substituting into the last equation we have:

so

which implies that the stationary points of  are

Evaluating the objective function f at these points yields

Thus the constrained maximum is 

 and the constrained minimum is 

.

Example 2 [edit]

Now we modify the objective function of Example 1 so that we minimize 

 instead of 

 again along the circle 

 Now the

level sets of  are still lines of slope −1, and the points on the circle tangent to

these level sets are again 

 and 

 These tangency points are

maxima of 

On the other hand, the minima occur on the level set for 

 (since by its

construction  cannot take negative values), at 

 and 

 where

the level curves of  are not tangent to the constraint. The condition that 

 correctly identifies all four points as extrema; the minima are

characterized in by 

 and the maxima by 

Example 3 [edit]

This example deals with more strenuous calculations, but it is still a single

constraint problem.

Suppose one wants to find the maximum values of

with the condition that the - and -coordinates lie on the circle around the origin with radius 

 That is, subject to the constraint

As there is just a single constraint, there is a single multiplier, say 

The constraint 

 is identically zero on the circle of radius 

 Any multiple of 

 may be added to 

 leaving 

 unchanged in

the region of interest (on the circle where our original constraint is satisfied).

Applying the ordinary Lagrange multiplier method yields

from which the gradient can be calculated:




Illustration of constrained optimization problem 3.

And therefore:

(iii) is just the original constraint. (i) implies 

 or 

 If 

 then 

 by (iii)

and consequently 

 from (ii). If 

 substituting this into (ii) yields 

Substituting this into (iii) and solving for  gives 

 Thus there are six critical

points of 

Evaluating the objective at these points, one finds that

Therefore, the objective function attains the global maximum (subject to the

constraints) at 

 and the global minimum at 

 The point 

 is a local minimum of  and 

 is a local maximum of 

as may be determined by consideration of the Hessian matrix of 

Note that while 

 is a critical point of 

 it is not a local extremum of 

 We have

Given any neighbourhood of 

 one can choose a small positive  and a small  of either sign to get  values both greater and

less than  This can also be seen from the Hessian matrix of  evaluated at this point (or indeed at any of the critical points) which is

an indefinite matrix. Each of the critical points of  is a saddle point of 

[4]

Example 4 [edit]

Entropy

Suppose we wish to find the discrete probability distribution on the points 

 with maximal information entropy. This is the same

as saying that we wish to find the least structured probability distribution on the points 

 In other words, we wish to maximize

the Shannon entropy equation:

For this to be a probability distribution the sum of the probabilities  at each point 

 must equal 1, so our constraint is:

We use Lagrange multipliers to find the point of maximum entropy, 

 across all discrete probability distributions  on 

 We

require that:

which gives a system of n equations, 

 such that:

Carrying out the differentiation of these n equations, we get

This shows that all 

 are equal (because they depend on λ only). By using the constraint

we find

Hence, the uniform distribution is the distribution with the greatest entropy, among distributions on n points.

Example 5 [edit]

Numerical optimization

The critical points of Lagrangians occur at saddle points, rather than at local maxima (or minima).[4][17] Unfortunately, many numerical

optimization techniques, such as hill climbing, gradient descent, some of the quasi-Newton methods, among others, are designed to

find local maxima (or minima) and not saddle points. For this reason, one must either modify the formulation to ensure that it's a

minimization problem (for example, by extremizing the square of the gradient of the Lagrangian as below), or else use an optimization

technique that finds stationary points (such as Newton's method without an extremum seeking line search) and not necessarily




Lagrange multipliers cause the critical points to

occur at saddle points (Example 5).



The magnitude of the gradient can be used to force

the critical points to occur at local minima

(Example 5).

extrema.

As a simple example, consider the problem of finding the value of x that minimizes 

 constrained such that 

 (This problem is somewhat untypical because

there are only two values that satisfy this constraint, but it is useful for illustration

purposes because the corresponding unconstrained function can be visualized in

three dimensions.)

Using Lagrange multipliers, this problem can be converted into an unconstrained

optimization problem:

The two critical points occur at saddle points where x = 1 and x = −1.

In order to solve this problem with a numerical optimization technique, we must first

transform this problem such that the critical points occur at local minima. This is

done by computing the magnitude of the gradient of the unconstrained

optimization problem.

First, we compute the partial derivative of the unconstrained problem with respect

to each variable:

If the target function is not easily differentiable, the differential with respect to each

variable can be approximated as

where  is a small value.

Next, we compute the magnitude of the gradient, which is the square root of the

sum of the squares of the partial derivatives:

(Since magnitude is always non-negative, optimizing over the squared-magnitude is equivalent to optimizing over the magnitude. Thus,

the "square root" may be omitted from these equations with no expected difference in the results of optimization.)

The critical points of h occur at x = 1 and x = −1, just as in 

 Unlike the critical points in 

 however, the critical points in h occur at

local minima, so numerical optimization techniques can be used to find them.

Applications [edit]

Control theory [edit]

In optimal control theory, the Lagrange multipliers are interpreted as costate variables, and Lagrange multipliers are reformulated as

the minimization of the Hamiltonian, in Pontryagin's minimum principle.

Nonlinear programming [edit]

The Lagrange multiplier method has several generalizations. In nonlinear programming there are several multiplier rules, e.g. the

Carathéodory–John Multiplier Rule and the Convex Multiplier Rule, for inequality constraints.[18]

Power systems [edit]

Methods based on Lagrange multipliers have applications in power systems, e.g. in distributed-energy-resources (DER) placement

and load shedding.[19]

See also [edit]

Adjustment of observations

Duality

Gittins index

Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions: generalization of the method of Lagrange multipliers

Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces: another generalization of the method of Lagrange multipliers


Lagrange multiplier test in maximum likelihood estimation

Lagrangian relaxation

References [edit]

1. ^ Hoffmann, Laurence D.; Bradley, Gerald L. (2004). Calculus for Business, Economics, and the Social and Life Sciences (8th ed.).

pp. 575–588. ISBN 0-07-242432-X.

2. ^ Beavis, Brian; Dobbs, Ian M. (1990). "Static Optimization" . Optimization and Stability Theory for Economic Analysis. New York:

Cambridge University Press. p. 40. ISBN 0-521-33605-8.

3. ^ Protter, Murray H.; Morrey, Charles B., Jr. (1985). Intermediate Calculus (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer. p. 267. ISBN 0-387-96058-9.

4. ^ a b c Walsh, G.R. (1975). "Saddle-point Property of Lagrangian Function" . Methods of Optimization. New York, NY: John Wiley &amp; Sons.

pp. 39–44. ISBN 0-471-91922-5.

5. ^ Kalman, Dan (2009). "Leveling with Lagrange: An alternate view of constrained optimization". Mathematics Magazine. 82 (3): 186–196.

doi:10.1080/0025570X.2009.11953617 . JSTOR 27765899 . S2CID 121070192 .

6. ^ a b Silberberg, Eugene; Suen, Wing (2001). The Structure of Economics : A Mathematical Analysis (Third ed.). Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.

pp. 134–141. ISBN 0-07-234352-4.

7. ^ de la Fuente, Angel (2000). Mathematical Methods and Models for Economists . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 285 .

doi:10.1017/CBO9780511810756 . ISBN 9780521585125.

8. ^ Luenberger, David G. (1969). Optimization by Vector Space Methods. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons. pp. 188–189.

9. ^ Bertsekas, Dimitri P. (1999). Nonlinear Programming (Second ed.). Cambridge, MA: Athena Scientific. ISBN 1-886529-00-0.

10. ^ Vapnyarskii, I.B. (2001) [1994], "Lagrange multipliers" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press.

11. ^ Lasdon, Leon S. (2002) [1970]. Optimization Theory for Large Systems (reprint ed.). Mineola, New York, NY: Dover. ISBN 0-486-41999-1.

MR 1888251 .

12. ^ Hiriart-Urruty, Jean-Baptiste; Lemaréchal, Claude (1993). "Chapter XII: Abstract duality for practitioners". Convex analysis and

minimization algorithms. Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Vol. 306.

Berlin, DE: Springer-Verlag. pp. 136–193 (and Bibliographical comments pp. 334–335). ISBN 3-540-56852-2. MR 1295240 . Volume II:

Advanced theory and bundle methods.

13. ^ Lemaréchal, Claude (15–19 May 2000). "Lagrangian relaxation". In Jünger, Michael; Naddef, Denis (eds.). Computational combinatorial

optimization: Papers from the Spring School held in Schloß Dagstuhl. Spring School held in Schloß Dagstuhl, May 15–19, 2000. Lecture

Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 2241. Berlin, DE: Springer-Verlag (published 2001). pp. 112–156. doi:10.1007/3-540-45586-8_4 . ISBN 3-

540-42877-1. MR 1900016 . S2CID 9048698 .

14. ^ Lafontaine, Jacques (2015). An Introduction to Differential Manifolds . Springer. p. 70. ISBN 9783319207353.

15. ^ Dixit, Avinash K. (1990). "Shadow Prices" . Optimization in Economic Theory (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 40–54.

ISBN 0-19-877210-6.

16. ^ Chiang, Alpha C. (1984). Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics  (Third ed.). McGraw-Hill. p. 386 . ISBN 0-07-010813-7.

17. ^ Heath, Michael T. (2005). Scientific Computing: An introductory survey . McGraw-Hill. p. 203. ISBN 978-0-07-124489-3.

18. ^ Pourciau, Bruce H. (1980). "Modern multiplier rules" . American Mathematical Monthly. 87 (6): 433–452. doi:10.2307/2320250 .

JSTOR 2320250 .

19. ^ Gautam, Mukesh; Bhusal, Narayan; Benidris, Mohammed (2020). A sensitivity-based approach to adaptive under-frequency load

shedding. 2020 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC). Institute of Electronic and Electrical Engineers. pp. 1–5.

doi:10.1109/TPEC48276.2020.9042569 .

Further reading [edit]

Beavis, Brian; Dobbs, Ian M. (1990). "Static Optimization" . Optimization and Stability Theory for Economic Analysis. New York, NY:

Cambridge University Press. pp. 32–72. ISBN 0-521-33605-8.

Bertsekas, Dimitri P. (1982). Constrained optimization and Lagrange multiplier methods. New York, NY: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-093480-9.

Beveridge, Gordon S.G.; Schechter, Robert S. (1970). "Lagrangian multipliers" . Optimization: Theory and Practice. New York, NY: McGraw-

Hill. pp. 244–259. ISBN 0-07-005128-3.

Binger, Brian R.; Hoffman, Elizabeth (1998). "Constrained optimization". Microeconomics with Calculus (2nd ed.). Reading: Addison-Wesley.

pp. 56–91. ISBN 0-321-01225-9.

Carter, Michael (2001). "Equality constraints" . Foundations of Mathematical Economics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. pp. 516–549. ISBN 0-

262-53192-5.

Hestenes, Magnus R. (1966). "Minima of functions subject to equality constraints". Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control Theory. New

York, NY: Wiley. pp. 29–34.

Wylie, C. Ray; Barrett, Louis C. (1995). "The extrema of integrals under constraint". Advanced Engineering Mathematics (Sixth ed.). New York,

NY: McGraw-Hill. pp. 1096–1103. ISBN 0-07-072206-4.

External links [edit]



The Wikibook Calculus optimization methods has a page on the topic of: Lagrange multipliers

Exposition


v · t · e

v · t · e

Kipid. "Method of Lagrange multipliers"

 (blog).

Steuard. "Conceptual introduction"

. slimy.com. — plus a brief discussion of Lagrange multipliers in the calculus of variations as

used in physics.

Carpenter, Kenneth H. 



"Lagrange multipliers for quadratic forms with linear constraints"

 (PDF). Kansas State University.

Additional text and interactive applets

Resnik. "Simple explanation with an example of governments using taxes as Lagrange multipliers"

. umiacs.umd.edu. University of

Maryland.

Klein, Dan. 



"Lagrange multipliers without permanent scarring] Explanation with focus on the intuition"

 (PDF). nlp.cs.berkeley.edu.

University of California, Berkeley.

Sathyanarayana, Shashi. "Geometric representation of method of Lagrange multipliers"

. wolfram.com (Mathematica

demonstration). Wolfram Research. "Needs Internet Explorer / Firefox / Safari." — Provides compelling insight in 2 dimensions that

at a minimizing point, the direction of steepest descent must be perpendicular to the tangent of the constraint curve at that point.

"Lagrange multipliers – two variables"

. MIT Open Courseware (ocw.mit.edu) (Applet). Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"Lagrange multipliers"

. MIT Open Courseware (ocw.mit.edu) (video lecture). Mathematics 18-02: Multivariable calculus.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Fall 2007.

Bertsekas. 



"Details on Lagrange multipliers"

 (PDF). athenasc.com (slides / course lecture). Non-Linear Programming. — Course

slides accompanying text on nonlinear optimization

Wyatt, John (7 April 2004) [19 November 2002]. 



"Legrange multipliers, constrained optimization, and the maximum entropy



principle"

 (PDF). www-mtl.mit.edu. Elec E &amp; C S / Mech E 6.050 – Information, entropy, and computation. — Geometric idea

behind Lagrange multipliers

"Using Lagrange multipliers in optimization"

. matlab.cheme.cmu.edu (MATLAB example). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon

University. 24 December 2011.

Calculus

Precalculus

Binomial theorem · Concave function · Continuous function · Factorial · Finite difference · Free variables and bound variables

· Graph of a function · Linear function · Radian · Rolle's theorem · Secant · Slope · Tangent

Limits

Indeterminate form · Limit of a function (One-sided limit) · Limit of a sequence · Order of approximation ·

(ε, δ)-definition of limit

Differential calculus

Derivative · Second derivative · Partial derivative · Differential · Differential operator · Mean value theorem · Notation

(Leibniz's notation · Newton's notation) · Rules of differentiation (linearity · Power · Sum · Chain · L'Hôpital's · Product

(General Leibniz's rule) · Quotient) · Other techniques (Implicit differentiation · Inverse functions and differentiation ·

Logarithmic derivative · Related rates) · Stationary points (First derivative test · Second derivative test · Extreme value theorem

· Maximum and minimum) · Further applications (Newton's method · Taylor's theorem) · Differential equation

(Ordinary differential equation · Partial differential equation · Stochastic differential equation)

Integral calculus

Antiderivative · Arc length · Riemann integral · Basic properties · Constant of integration · Fundamental theorem of calculus

(Differentiating under the integral sign) · Integration by parts · Integration by substitution (trigonometric · Euler ·

Tangent half-angle substitution) · Partial fractions in integration (Quadratic integral) · Trapezoidal rule · Volumes

(Washer method · Shell method) · Integral equation · Integro-differential equation

Vector calculus

Derivatives (Curl · Directional derivative · Divergence · Gradient · Laplacian) · Basic theorems (Line integrals · Green's ·

Stokes' · Gauss')

Multivariable calculus

Divergence theorem · Geometric · Hessian matrix · Jacobian matrix and determinant · Lagrange multiplier · Line integral ·

Matrix · Multiple integral · Partial derivative · Surface integral · Volume integral · Advanced topics (Differential forms ·

Exterior derivative · Generalized Stokes' theorem · Tensor calculus)

Sequences and series

Arithmetico-geometric sequence · Types of series (Alternating · Binomial · Fourier · Geometric · Harmonic · Infinite · Power

(Maclaurin · Taylor) · Telescoping) · Tests of convergence (Abel's · Alternating series · Cauchy condensation ·

Direct comparison · Dirichlet's · Integral · Limit comparison · Ratio · Root · Term)

Special functions

and numbers

Bernoulli numbers · e (mathematical constant) · Exponential function · Natural logarithm · Stirling's approximation

History of calculus

Adequality · Brook Taylor · Colin Maclaurin · Generality of algebra · Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz · Infinitesimal ·

Infinitesimal calculus · Isaac Newton · Fluxion · Law of Continuity · Leonhard Euler · Method of Fluxions ·

The Method of Mechanical Theorems

Lists

Differentiation rules · List of integrals of exponential functions · List of integrals of hyperbolic functions ·

List of integrals of inverse hyperbolic functions · List of integrals of inverse trigonometric functions ·

List of integrals of irrational functions · List of integrals of logarithmic functions · List of integrals of rational functions ·

List of integrals of trigonometric functions (Secant · Secant cubed) · List of limits · Lists of integrals

Miscellaneous topics

Complex calculus (Contour integral) · Differential geometry (Manifold · Curvature · of curves · of surfaces · Tensor) ·

Euler–Maclaurin formula · Gabriel's horn · Integration Bee · Proof that 22/7 exceeds π ·

Regiomontanus' angle maximization problem · Steinmetz solid

Joseph-Louis Lagrange


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 17 April 2023, at 17:45 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of

Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Lagrange multiplier · Lagrange polynomial · Lagrange's four-square theorem · Lagrange's theorem (group theory) · Lagrange's identity ·

Lagrange's identity (boundary value problem) · Lagrange's trigonometric identities · Lagrange multiplier · Lagrangian mechanics ·

Lagrange's mean value theorem · Lagrange stability

Categories: Multivariable calculus

Mathematical optimization

Mathematical and quantitative methods (economics)



