
Cluster Analysis in Data Mining: Applications, Methods &amp; Requirements

by 

by Rohit Sharma

Rohit Sharma

Rohit Sharma is the Program Director for the UpGrad-IIIT Bangalore, PG Diploma Data Analytics Program.

LAST UPDATED: AUG 31, 2022

·

9 min read

Home &gt; Data Science &gt; Cluster Analysis in Data Mining: Applications, Methods &amp; Requirements

Here we are going to discuss Cluster Analysis in Data Mining. So ﬁrst let us know

about what is clustering in data mining then its introduction and the need for

clustering in data mining. The blogs cover how to deﬁne clustering in data mining,

the different types of cluster in data mining and why clustering is so important. We

are also going to discuss the algorithms and applications of cluster analysis in data

science. Later we will learn about the different approaches in cluster analysis and

data mining clustering methods.

What is Clustering in Data Mining?

In clustering, a group of different data objects is classiﬁed as similar objects. One

group means a cluster of data. Data sets are divided into different groups in the

cluster analysis, which is based on the similarity of the data. After the classiﬁcation of

data into various groups, a label is assigned to the group. It helps in adapting to the

changes by doing the classiﬁcation.

PROGRAMS

PROGRAMS 







Table of Contents

Table of Contents




So if we were to deﬁne clustering in data mining, then we can say that the process of

cluster in data mining is basically comprising a set of abstract objects into groups of

similar objects. The process of dividing and storing them in these groups is known as

cluster analysis.

Read: Common Examples of Data Mining.

What is Cluster Analysis in Data Mining?

Cluster Analysis in Data Mining means that to ﬁnd out the group of objects which are

similar to each other in the group but are different from the object in other groups. In

the process of clustering in data analytics, the sets of data are divided into groups or

classes based on data similarity. Then each of these classes is labelled according to

their data types. Going through clustering in data mining example can help you

understand the analysis more extensively.

Applications of Data Mining Cluster Analysis

There are many uses of Data clustering analysis such as image processing, data

analysis, pattern recognition, market research and many more. Using Data clustering,

companies can discover new groups in the database of customers. They can also

classify the existing customer base into distinct groups depending on the patterns of

their purchases. Classiﬁcation of data can also be done based on patterns of

purchasing.

Taxonomy or the classiﬁcation of animals with the help of cluster analysis is very

common in the ﬁeld of biology. Clustering can help identify and group species with

similar genetic features and functionalities and also give us an understanding of

some of the most commonly found inherent structures of speciﬁc populations or

species.  Areas are identiﬁed using the clustering in data mining. In the database of

earth observation, lands are identiﬁed which are similar to each other.

Also read

Also read: Free data structures and algorithm course!

Based on geographic location, value and house type, a group of houses are deﬁned

in the city. Clustering in data mining helps in the discovery of information by

classifying the ﬁles on the internet. It is also used in detection applications. Fraud in a

credit card can be easily detected using clustering in data mining which analyzes the

pattern of deception. Read more about the applications of data science in ﬁnance


pattern of deception. Read more about the applications of data science in ﬁnance

industry.

If someone wanted to observe the characteristics of each data cluster, then cluster

analysis can act as the tool to help them gain insight into the data clusters.  

It helps in understanding each cluster and its characteristics. One can understand

how the data is distributed, and it works as a tool in the function of data mining.

Check out our data science courses to upskill yourself.

upGrad’s Exclusive Data Science Webinar for you –

upGrad’s Exclusive Data Science Webinar for you –

Requirements of Clustering in Data Mining

Interpretability

Interpretability

The result of clustering should be usable, understandable and interpretable. The main

aim of clustering in data analytics is to make sure haphazard data is stored in groups

based on their characteristical similarity. 

Helps in dealing with messed up data

Helps in dealing with messed up data

Usually, the data is messed up and unstructured. It cannot be analyzed quickly, and

that is why the clustering of information is so signiﬁcant in data mining. Grouping can

give some structure to the data by organizing it into groups of similar data objects.

It becomes more comfortable for the data expert in processing the data and also

discover new things. Analyzing data that has already been classiﬁed and labelled

through clustering is much easier than analyzing unstructured data. It also leaves less

room for error. 

Must read

Must read: Learn excel online free!

High Dimensional

High Dimensional

Data clustering is also able to handle the data of high dimension along with the data

of small size. The clustering algorithms in data mining need to be able to handle any

dimension of data. 

https://cdn.upgrad.com/blog/jai-kapoor.mp4

00:00

00:00

Transformation &amp; Opportunities in Analytics &amp; Insights


Attribute shape clusters are discovered

Attribute shape clusters are discovered

Clustering algorithms in data mining should be able to detect arbitrarily shaped

clusters. These algorithms should not be limited by only being able to ﬁnd smaller,

spherical clusters.

Explore our Popular Data Science Courses

Executive Post Graduate Programme

in Data Science from IIITB

Professional Certificate Program in

Data Science for Business Decision

Making

Master of Science in Data Science

from University of Arizona

Advanced Certificate Programme in

Data Science from IIITB

Professional Certificate Program in

Data Science and Business Analytics

from University of Maryland

Data Science Courses

Dealing with Erroneous Data 

Dealing with Erroneous Data 

Usually, databases carry a lot of erroneous, noisy or absent data. If the algorithm

being used during clustering is very sensitive to this type of anomaly, then it can lead

to low-quality clusters. That is why it is very important that your clustering algorithm

can handle this type of data without problems. 

Algorithm Usability with multiple data kind

Algorithm Usability with multiple data kind

Many different kinds of data can be used with algorithms of clustering. The data can

be like binary data, categorical and interval-based data.

Read: Data Mining Algorithms You Should Know

Clustering Scalability

Clustering Scalability

The database usually is enormous to deal with. The algorithm should be scalable to

handle extensive database, so it needs to be scalable.

Top Data Science Skills to Learn

Top Data Science Skills to Learn

1

Data Analysis Course

Inferential Statistics Courses

2

Hypothesis Testing Programs

Logistic Regression Courses

3

Linear Regression Courses

Linear Algebra for Analysis


Data Mining Clustering Methods

Let’s take a look at different types of clustering in data mining!

1. Partitioning Clustering Method

In this method, let us say that “m” partition is done on the “p” objects of the database.

A cluster will be represented by each partition and m &lt; p. K is the number of groups

after the classiﬁcation of objects. There are some requirements which need to be

satisﬁed with this Partitioning Clustering Method and they are: –

1. One objective should only belong to only one group.

2. There should be no group without even a single purpose.

There are some points which should be remembered in this type of Partitioning

Clustering Method which are:

1. There will be an initial partitioning if we already give no. of a partition (say m).

2. There is one technique called iterative relocation, which means the object will be

moved from one group to another to improve the partitioning.

Our learners also read:

Our learners also read: Free Python Course with Certiﬁcation

2. Hierarchical Clustering Methods

Among the many different types of clustering in data mining, In this hierarchical

clustering method, the given set of an object of data is created into a kind of

hierarchical decomposition. The formation of hierarchical decomposition will decide

the purposes of classiﬁcation. There are two types of approaches for the creation of

hierarchical decomposition, which are: –

1. Divisive Approach

1. Divisive Approach

Another name for the Divisive approach is a top-down approach. At the beginning of

this method, all the data objects are kept in the same cluster. Smaller clusters are

created by splitting the group by using the continuous iteration. The constant

iteration method will keep on going until the condition of termination is met. One

cannot undo after the group is split or merged, and that is why this method is not so

ﬂexible.


ﬂexible.

2. Agglomerative Approach

2. Agglomerative Approach

Another name for this approach is the bottom-up approach. All the groups are

separated in the beginning. Then it keeps on merging until all the groups are merged,

or condition of termination is met.

There are two approaches which can be used to improve the Hierarchical Clustering

Quality in Data Mining which are: –

1. One should carefully analyze the linkages of the object at every partitioning of

hierarchical clustering.

2. One can use a hierarchical agglomerative algorithm for the integration of

hierarchical agglomeration. In this approach, ﬁrst, the objects are grouped into

micro-clusters. After grouping data objects into microclusters, macro clustering is

performed on the microcluster.

3. Density-Based Clustering Method

In this method of clustering in Data Mining, density is the main focus. The notion of

mass is used as the basis for this clustering method. In this clustering method, the

cluster will keep on growing continuously. At least one number of points should be

there in the radius of the group for each point of data.

4. Grid-Based Clustering Method

In this type of Grid-Based Clustering Method, a grid is formed using the object

together. A Grid Structure is formed by quantifying the object space into a ﬁnite

number of cells.

Advantage of Grid-based clustering method: –

Advantage of Grid-based clustering method: –

1. Faster time of processing: The processing time of this method is much quicker than

another way, and thus it can save time.

2. This method depends on the no. of cells in the space of quantized each dimension.

5. Model-Based Clustering Methods

In this type of clustering method, every cluster is hypothesized so that it can ﬁnd the


data which is best suited for the model. The density function is clustered to locate the

group in this method.

6. Constraint-Based Clustering Method

Application or user-oriented constraints are incorporated to perform the clustering.

The expectation of the user is referred to as the constraint. In this process of

grouping, communication is very interactive, which is provided by the restrictions.

Read our popular Data Science Articles

Data Science Career Path: A

Comprehensive Career Guide

Data Science Career Growth: The

Future of Work is here

Why is Data Science Important? 8

Ways Data Science Brings Value to

the Business

Relevance of Data Science for

Managers

The Ultimate Data Science Cheat

Sheet Every Data Scientists Should

Have

Top 6 Reasons Why You Should

Become a Data Scientist

A Day in the Life of Data Scientist:

What do they do?

Myth Busted: Data Science doesn’t

need Coding

Business Intelligence vs Data Science:

What are the differences?

What kinds of classification is not considered a cluster analysis?

1. Graph Partitioning

Graph Partitioning – The type of classiﬁcation where areas are not the same and

are only classiﬁed based on mutual synergy and relevance is not cluster analysis.

2. Results of a query

Results of a query – In this type of classiﬁcation, the groups are created based on

the speciﬁcation given from external sources. It is not counted as a Cluster

Analysis.

3. Simple Segmentation

Simple Segmentation – Division of names into separate groups of registration

based on the last name does not qualify as Cluster Analysis.

4. Supervised Classiﬁcation

Supervised Classiﬁcation – Those type of classiﬁcation which is classiﬁed using

label information cannot be said as Cluster Analysis because cluster analysis

involves group based on the pattern.

Conclusion

So now we have learned many things about Data Clustering such as the approaches

and methods of Data Clustering and Cluster Analysis in Data mining. Going through

diverse clustering in data mining example can further assist you to get an in-depth

insight into the process. 

If you are curious to learn data science, check out our IIIT-B and upGrad’s Executive








PG Programme in Data Science which is created for working professionals and offers

10+ case studies &amp; projects, practical hands-on workshops, mentorship with industry

experts, 1-on-1 with industry mentors, 400+ hours of learning and job assistance with

top ﬁrms.

What are some of the drawbacks of cluster analysis?

Cluster analysis is a statistical approach that presupposes no prior knowledge of the market or

customer behavior. Some cluster analysis methods produce somewhat different ﬁndings each time

the statistical analysis is conducted. This can arise because there is no one-size-ﬁts-all method to

data analysis. Changing data outputs can be confusing and irritating for students who are new to

the notion of cluster analysis.

How is cluster purity and cluster quality calculated?

We multiply the total number of data points by the number of accurate class labels in each cluster.

Purity rises as the number of clusters rises in general. If we have a model that organizes each

observation into its own cluster, for example, the purity becomes one. We may compute the

average silhouette coeﬃcient value of all objects in a cluster to determine its ﬁtness inside a

clustering. The average silhouette coeﬃcient value of all objects in the data set may be used to

assess the quality of a grouping.

What are the distinctions between K-means and K-medoids?

K-means tries to reduce total squared error, whereas k-medoids tries to reduce the sum of

dissimilarities between points classiﬁed as being in a cluster and a point chosen as the cluster's

center. Unlike the k-means method, the k-medoids algorithm picks data points as centers (

medoids or exemplars).

Want to share this article?

Want to share this article?



Prepare for a Career of the Future

APPLY NOW FOR ADVANCED CERTIFICATION IN DATA SCIENCE

APPLY NOW FOR ADVANCED CERTIFICATION IN DATA SCIENCE




PRE V

PRE V

NE X T

NE X T



Data Science for Managers

from IIM Kozhikode - Duration

8 Months

Executive PG Program in Data

Science from IIIT-B - Duration

12 Months

Master of Science in Data

Science from LJMU - Duration

18 Months

Executive Post Graduate

Program in Data Science and

Machine LEarning - Duration 12

Months

Master of Science in Data

Science from University of

Arizona - Duration 24 Months



Our Trending Data

Science Courses

Our Popular Data

Science Course




By clicking 'Submit' you Agree to UpGrad's Terms &amp;

Conditions.

Data Analysis Courses

Inferential Statistics Courses

Hypothesis Testing Courses



Get Free Consultation



First Name



Last Name





Select Course



Email



Phone No.



City

Submit

Submit

Data Science Skills To

Master


Logistic Regression Courses

Linear Regression Courses

Linear Algebra for Analysis

Courses

Related Articles

 

 

Leave a comment





by Rohit Sharma

Apr 12, 2023

OLTP Vs OLAP: Decoding Top

Differences Every Data

Professional Must Know









by Rohit Sharma

Apr 10, 2023

Amazon Data Scientist Salary in

India 2023 – Freshers to

Experienced









by Rohit Sharma

Apr 10, 2023

Data warehouse architect:

Overview, skills, salary, roles &amp;

more





Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website


Explore Free Courses

Explore Free Courses

 

 

 

Building Careers of Tomorrow

Post Comment



Data Science &amp; Machine Learning

Data Science &amp; Machine Learning

Build your foundation in one of the hottest

industry of the 21st century





Technology

Technology

Build essential technical skills to move

forward in your career in these evolving

times





Career Planning

Career Planning

Get insights from industry leaders and career

counselors and learn how to stay ahead in

your career





Management

Management

Master industry-relevant skills that are

required to become a leader and drive

organizational success





Marketing

Marketing

Advance your career in the ﬁeld of marketing

with Industry relevant free courses





Law

Law

Kickstart your career in law by building a

solid foundation with these relevant free

courses.






KEEP IN TOUCH

KEEP IN TOUCH









© 2015–2023 upGrad Education Private Limited. All rights reserved















Download Career Growth report

