
Successfully working your way through probability problems means understanding some basic rules of probability along with discrete and

continuous probability distributions. Here are some helpful study tips to help you get well-prepared for a probability exam.

Principles of probability

The mathematics field of probability has its own rules, definitions, and laws, which you can use to find the probability of outcomes, events,

or combinations of outcomes and events.

To determine probability, you need to add or subtract, multiply or divide the probabilities of the original outcomes and events. You use

some combinations so often that they have their own rules and formulas. The better you understand the ideas behind the formulas, the

more likely it is that you’ll remember them and be able to use them successfully.

Probability rules



Probability For Dummies



Explore Book 

Buy On Amazon

Search for articles and books

Probability For Dummies Cheat Sheet

By: Deborah J. Rumsey

Updated: 07-07-2021


Probability definitions



Probability laws



Counting rules



Discrete probability distributions

In probability, a discrete distribution has either a finite or a countably infinite number of possible values. That means you can enumerate

or make a listing of all possible values, such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 1, 2, 3, . . .

There are several kinds of discrete probability distributions, including discrete uniform, binomial, Poisson, geometric, negative binomial,

and hypergeometric.




Continuous probability distributions

When you work with continuous probability distributions, the functions can take many forms. These include continuous uniform,

exponential, normal, standard normal (Z), binomial approximation, Poisson approximation, and distributions for the sample mean and

sample proportion.

When you work with the normal distribution, you need to keep in mind that it’s a continuous distribution, not a discrete one. A continuous

distribution’s probability function takes the form of a continuous curve, and its random variable takes on an uncountably infinite number of

possible values. This means the set of possible values is written as an interval, such as negative infinity to positive infinity, zero to infinity,

or an interval like [0, 10], which represents all real numbers from 0 to 10, including 0 and 10.




Probability study tips

If you’re going to take a probability exam, you can better your chances of acing the test by studying the following topics. They have a high

probability of being on the exam.

The relationship between mutually exclusive and independent events

Identifying when a probability is a conditional probability in a word problem

Probability concepts that go against your intuition

Marginal, conditional, and joint probabilities for a two-way table

The Central Limit Theorem:



When to use a permutation and when to use a combination

Finding E(X) from scratch and interpreting it

Sampling with replacement versus without replacement


About This Article

This article is from the book:

Probability For Dummies

About the book author: Deborah Rumsey has a PhD in Statistics from The Ohio State University (1993). Upon graduating, she joined

the faculty in the Department of Statistics at Kansas State University, where she won the distinguished Presidential Teaching Award and

earned tenure and promotion in 1998. In 2000, she returned to Ohio State and is now a Statistics Education Specialist/Auxiliary Faculty

Member for the Department of Statistics. Dr. Rumsey has served on the American Statistical Association’s Statistics Education Executive

Committee and is the Editor of the Teaching Bits section of the Journal of Statistics Education. She’s the author of the books Statistics

For Dummies and Statistics Workbook For Dummies (Wiley). She also has published many papers and given many professional

presentations on the subject of Statistics Education. Her particular research interests are curriculum materials development, teacher

training and support, and immersive learning environments. Her passions, besides teaching, include her family, fishing, bird watching,

driving a new Kubota tractor on the family “farm,” and Ohio State Buckeye football (not necessarily in that order).

This article can be found in the category:

Statistics

The Law of Total Probability and Bayes’ Theorem

When the Poisson and exponential are needed in the same problem

From the Book Probability For Dummies

Figuring Out What Probability Means

Using Probability When Hitting the Slot Machines

Discrete Probability Distributions

Probability Study Tips

Continuous Probability Distributions

View All Articles From Book

Quick Links


About For Dummies

Contact Us

Activate A Book Pin

Connect

Opt in to our newsletter!

By entering your email address and clicking the “Submit” button, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy &amp; to receive electronic communications from Dummies.com, which

may include marketing promotions, news and updates.

Submit

Enter Email Address

About Dummies

Dummies has always stood for taking on complex concepts and making them easy to understand. Dummies helps everyone be more

knowledgeable and confident in applying what they know. Whether it's to pass that big test, qualify for that big promotion or even master

that cooking technique; people who rely on dummies, rely on it to learn the critical skills and relevant information necessary for success.

Terms of Use

Privacy Policy

Cookies Settings

Do Not Sell My Personal Info - CA Only

