
 yedivanseven / PLSA Public

Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis

 GPL-3.0 license

 20 stars  14 forks

View code

README.md



docs

docs passing

passing

PLSA

python  implementation of Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis

What PLSA can do for you

Broadly speaking, PLSA is a tool of Natural Language Processing (NLP). It analyses a collection of text documents (a corpus) under the

assumption that there are (by far) fewer topics to write about than there are documents in the corpus. It then tries to identify these topics

(in terms of words and their relative importance to each topic) and to give you the relative importance of a pre-specified number of

topics in each document.

In doing so, it does not actually try to "make sense" of each document (or "understand" it) by contextually analysing it. Rather, it simply

counts how often which word occurs in each document, regardless of the context in which they occur. As such, it belongs to the family of

so-called bag-of-words models.

In reducing a large number of documents to a much smaller number of topics, PSLA can be seen as an example of unsupervised

dimensionality reduction, most related to non-negative matrix factorization.

To give an example, a bunch of documents might frequently contain words like "eating", "nutrition", "health", etc. Others might contain

words like "state", "party", "ministry", etc. Yet others might contain words like "tournament", "ranking", "win", etc. It is easy to imagine

there being documents that contain a mixture of these words. Not knowing in advance how many topics there are, one would have to

run PLSA with several different numbers of topics and see the results to judge how many is a good choice. Picking three in our example

would yield topics that could be described as "food", "politics", and "sports" and, while a number of documents will emerge as being

 Star



Notifications

 

Code

 

Issues 2

 

Pull requests 3

 

Actions

 

Projects

 

Security

 

Insights

 master 



 

Sign up


purely about one of these topics, it is easy to imagine that there are others that have contributions from more than one topic (e.g., about

a new initiative from the ministry of health, combining "food" and "politics"). PLSA will give you that mixture.

Installation

This code is available on the python package index PyPi. To install, I strongly recommend setting up a new virtual python environment,

and then type

on the console.

WARNING: On first use, some components of nltk  that don't come with it out-of-the-box wil be downloaded. Should you install

(against my express recommendation) install the plsa  package system-wide (with sudo ), then you lack the access rights to write the

required nltk  data to where it is supposed to go (into a subfolder of the plsa  package directory).

Dependencies

This package depends on the following python packages:

numpy

matplotlib

wordcould

nltk

If you want to run the example notebook, you will also need to install the jupyter  package.

Getting Started

Clone the GitHub repository and run the jupyter  notebook Examples.ipynb in the notebooks folder.

Documentation

Read the API documentation on Read the Docs

Technical considerations

The matrices to store and manipulate data can easily get quite large. That means you will soon run out of memory when toying with a

large corpus. This could be mitigated to some extent by using sparse matrices. But since there is no built-in support for sparse matrices

of more than 2 dimensions (we need 3) in scipy , this is not implemented.

Releases 5

Latest Latest

Sep 18, 2019

+ 4 releases

Packages

No packages published 

pip install plsa


Languages

 Python 83.0%  Jupyter Notebook 17.0%

 © 2023 GitHub, Inc.

Terms

Privacy

Security

Status

Docs

Contact GitHub

Pricing

API

Training

Blog

About

