
What is text mining?

Learn about text mining, which is the practice of analyzing vast collections of textual materials to capture key concepts, trends

and hidden relationships

What is text mining?

Text mining, also known as text data mining, is the process of transforming unstructured text into a structured format to identify

meaningful patterns and new insights. By applying advanced analytical techniques, such as Naïve Bayes, Support Vector Machines

(SVM), and other deep learning algorithms, companies are able to explore and discover hidden relationships within their

unstructured data.

Text is a one of the most common data types within databases. Depending on the database, this data can be organized as:

Since roughly 80% of data in the world resides in an unstructured format (link resides outside ibm.com), text mining is an extremely

valuable practice within organizations. Text mining tools and natural language processing (NLP) techniques, like information

extraction (PDF, 131 KB) (link reside outside of IBM), allow us to transform unstructured documents into a structured format to

enable analysis and the generation of high-quality insights. This, in turn, improves the decision-making of organizations, leading to

better business outcomes.

Text mining vs. text analytics

The terms, text mining and text analytics, are largely synonymous in meaning in conversation, but they can have a more nuanced

meaning.  Text mining and text analysis identiﬁes textual patterns and trends within unstructured data through the use of machine

learning, statistics, and linguistics. By transforming the data into a more structured format through text mining and text analysis,

more quantitative insights can be found through text analytics. Data visualization techniques can then be harnessed to

communicate ﬁndings to wider audiences.

Text mining techniques

The process of text mining comprises several activities that enable you to deduce information from unstructured text data. Before

you can apply different text mining techniques, you must start with text preprocessing, which is the practice of cleaning and

transforming text data into a usable format. This practice is a core aspect of natural language processing (NLP) and it usually

involves the use of techniques such as language identiﬁcation, tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, chunking, and syntax parsing to

format data appropriately for analysis. When text preprocessing is complete, you can apply text mining algorithms to derive insights

from the data. Some of these common text mining techniques include:

Information retrieval

Information retrieval (IR) returns relevant information or documents based on a pre-deﬁned set of queries or phrases. IR systems

utilize algorithms to track user behaviors and identify relevant data. Information retrieval is commonly used in library catalogue

systems and popular search engines, like Google. Some common IR sub-tasks include:

Natural language processing (NLP)

Natural language processing, which evolved from computational linguistics, uses methods from various disciplines, such as

Structured data:

Structured data: This data is standardized into a tabular format with numerous rows and columns, making it easier to store and

process for analysis and machine learning algorithms. Structured data can include inputs such as names, addresses, and phone

numbers.

Unstructured data: 

Unstructured data: This data does not have a predeﬁned data format. It can include text from sources, like social media or

product reviews, or rich media formats like, video and audio ﬁles.

Semi-structured data: 

Semi-structured data: As the name suggests, this data is a blend between structured and unstructured data formats. While it

has some organization, it doesn’t have enough structure to meet the requirements of a relational database. Examples of semi-

structured data include XML, JSON and HTML ﬁles.

Tokenization:

Tokenization: This is the process of breaking out long-form text into sentences and words called “tokens”. These are, then, used

in the models, like bag-of-words, for text clustering and document matching tasks. 

Stemming:

Stemming: This refers to the process of separating the preﬁxes and sufﬁxes from words to derive the root word form and

meaning. This technique improves information retrieval by reducing the size of indexing ﬁles.


computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence, linguistics, and data science, to enable computers to understand human language in both

written and verbal forms. By analyzing sentence structure and grammar, NLP sub-tasks allow computers to “read”. Common sub-

tasks include:

Information extraction

Information extraction (IE) surfaces the relevant pieces of data when searching various documents. It also focuses on extracting

structured information from free text and storing these entities, attributes, and relationship information in a database. Common

information extraction sub-tasks include:

Data mining

Data mining is the process of identifying patterns and extracting useful insights from big data sets. This practice evaluates both

structured and unstructured data to identify new information, and it is commonly utilized to analyze consumer behaviors within

marketing and sales. Text mining is essentially a sub-ﬁeld of data mining as it focuses on bringing structure to unstructured data

and analyzing it to generate novel insights. The techniques mentioned above are forms of data mining but fall under the scope of

textual data analysis.

Text mining applications

Text analytics software has impacted the way that many industries work, allowing them to improve product user experiences as

well as make faster and better business decisions. Some use cases include:

Customer service: 

Customer service: There are various ways in which we solicit customer feedback from our users. When combined with text analytics

tools, feedback systems, such as chatbots, customer surveys, NPS (net-promoter scores), online reviews, support tickets, and social

media proﬁles, enable companies to improve their customer experience with speed. Text mining and sentiment analysis can provide

a mechanism for companies to prioritize key pain points for their customers, allowing businesses to respond to urgent issues in

real-time and increase customer satisfaction. Learn how Verizon is using text analytics in customer service.

Risk management: 

Risk management: Text mining also has applications in risk management, where it can provide insights around industry trends and

ﬁnancial markets by monitoring shifts in sentiment and by extracting information from analyst reports and whitepapers. This is

particularly valuable to banking institutions as this data provides more conﬁdence when considering business investments across

various sectors. Learn how CIBC and EquBot are using text analytics for risk mitigation.

Summarization: 

Summarization: This technique provides a synopsis of long pieces of text to create a concise, coherent summary of a document’s

main points.

Part-of-Speech (PoS) tagging: 

Part-of-Speech (PoS) tagging: This technique assigns a tag to every token in a document based on its part of speech—i.e.

denoting nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc. This step enables semantic analysis on unstructured text.

Text categorization

Text categorization: This task, which is also known as text classiﬁcation, is responsible for analyzing text documents and

classifying them based on predeﬁned topics or categories. This sub-task is particularly helpful when categorizing synonyms and

abbreviations.

Sentiment analysis

Sentiment analysis: This task detects positive or negative sentiment from internal or external data sources, allowing you to

track changes in customer attitudes over time. It is commonly used to provide information about perceptions of brands,

products, and services. These insights can propel businesses to connect with customers and improve processes and user

experiences.

Feature selection,

Feature selection, or attribute selection, is the process of selecting the important features (dimensions) to contribute the most

to output of a predictive analytics model.

Feature extraction

Feature extraction is the process of selecting a subset of features to improve the accuracy of a classiﬁcation task. This is

particularly important for dimensionality reduction.

Named-entity recognition (NER)

Named-entity recognition (NER) also known as entity identiﬁcation or entity extraction, aims to ﬁnd and categorize speciﬁc

entities in text, such as names or locations. For example, NER identiﬁes “California” as a location and “Mary” as a woman’s

name.


Maintenance:

Maintenance: Text mining provides a rich and complete picture of the operation and functionality of products and machinery. Over

time, text mining automates decision making by revealing patterns that correlate with problems and preventive and reactive

maintenance procedures. Text analytics helps maintenance professionals unearth the root cause of challenges and failures faster.

Healthcare: 

Healthcare: Text mining techniques have been increasingly valuable to researchers in the biomedical ﬁeld, particularly for clustering

information. Manual investigation of medical research can be costly and time-consuming; text mining provides an automation

method for extracting valuable information from medical literature.

Spam ﬁltering: 

Spam ﬁltering: Spam frequently serves as an entry point for hackers to infect computer systems with malware. Text mining can

provide a method to ﬁlter and exclude these e-mails from inboxes, improving the overall user experience and minimizing the risk of

cyber-attacks to end users.

Related Solutions

IBM Watson Discovery

IBM Watson Discovery is an award-winning AI-powered search technology that eliminates data silos and retrieves information

buried inside enterprise data.

Explore Watson Discovery 

Natural language understanding

Watson Natural Language Understanding is a cloud native product that uses deep learning to extract metadata from text such as

keywords, emotion, and syntax.

Explore natural language understanding 

Natural language processing

NLP is AI that speaks the language of your business. Build solutions that drive 383% ROI over three years with IBM Watson

Discovery.

Explore natural language processing 

Resources

Take the next step

Find trends with IBM Watson Discovery so your business can make better decisions informed by data. Text analytics dig

through your data in real time to reveal hidden patterns, trends and relationships between different pieces of content. Use text

analytics to gain insights into customer and user behavior, analyze trends in social media and e-commerce, ﬁnd the root causes

of problems and more. There is untapped business value in your hidden insights. Try IBM Watson Discovery today

Blog

IBM Watson enables your business to get started with text analytics

Learn how IBM Watson can help you with text analytics.

Conference paper

Text mining for history: First steps on building a large dataset

This paper presents the initial efforts towards the creation of a new corpus on the history domain.

