
Introduction

The term ‘information retrieval’ was coined in 1952 and gained popularity in the

research community from 1961 onwards.1 At that time the organizing function of

information retrieval was seen as a major advance in libraries that were no longer

just storehouses of books, but also places where the information they hold is

catalogued and indexed.2 Subsequently, with the introduction of computers in

information handling, there appeared a number of databases containing

bibliographic details of documents, often married with abstracts, keywords, and so

on, and consequently the concept of information retrieval came to mean the retrieval

of bibliographic information from stored document databases. 

Information retrieval is concerned with all the activities related to the organization

of, processing of, and access to, information of all forms and formats. An information

retrieval system allows people to communicate with an information system or service

in order to find information – text, graphic images, sound recordings or video that meet

their specific needs.

Thus the objective of an information retrieval system is to enable users to find

relevant information from an organized collection of documents. In fact, most

information retrieval systems are, truly speaking, document retrieval systems, since

they are designed to retrieve information about the existence (or non-existence) of

documents relevant to a user query. Lancaster3 comments that an information

retrieval system does not inform (change the knowledge of) the user on the subject

of their enquiry; it merely informs them of the existence (or non-existence) and

whereabouts of documents relating to their request. However, this notion of

information retrieval has changed since the availability of full text documents in

bibliographic databases. Modern information retrieval systems can either retrieve

bibliographic items, or the exact text that matches a user’s search criteria from a

stored database of full texts of documents. Although information retrieval systems

originally meant text retrieval systems, since they were dealing with textual

documents, many modern information retrieval systems deal with multimedia

information comprising text, audio, images and video. While many features of

conventional text retrieval systems are equally applicable to multimedia

information retrieval, the specific nature of audio, image and video information has

called for the development of many new tools and techniques for information

1

Basic concepts of information

retrieval systems


retrieval. Modern information retrieval deals with storage, organization and access

to text, as well as multimedia information resources. 

Features of an information retrieval system

Figure 1.1 presents the conceptual view of an information retrieval system. An

information retrieval system is designed to enable users to find relevant information

from a stored and organized collection of documents. Thus the concept of

information retrieval presupposes that there are some documents or records

containing information that have been organized in an order suitable for easy

retrieval. The documents or records we are concerned with contain bibliographic

information, which is quite different from other kinds of information or data. We

may take a simple example. If we have a database of information about an office or

a supermarket, all we have are the different kinds of records and related facts, such

as, for an office, names of employees, their positions, salary and so on; in the case of

a supermarket, names of different items, prices, quantity and so forth. The retrieval

system here is designed to search for and retrieve specific facts or data, such as the

salary of a particular manager, or the price of a certain perfume. Conventional

database management systems, such as Access, Oracle, MySQL, and so on, deal with

structured data, where the organization or structuring of data takes place depending

on the specific attributes of the data elements. For example, in a database of

university students, the various data elements could be the attributes of specific

student records, such as student registration number, student name, address, subjects

studied, grades and so on. In contrast to this, a database of items sold in a supermarket

could be the name of the item with its barcode, manufacturer, supplier, price and so

forth. So, the first database in this example will be structured according to the specific

attributes of students, while in the second case the database will be structured

according to the attributes of specific products. The particular objective of these

databases is to allow the user to search for specific records that match one or more

specific conditions or search criteria, for example, details of a certain student with a

particular registration number; details of a specific product with a particular barcode;

a list of all the students that are registered for a specific course; or the products of a

particular type within a certain price range, for example toothpaste that costs between

one and four pounds. 

As opposed to a conventional database management system, an information

retrieval system is designed to deal with unstructured data. The major objective of

an information retrieval system is to retrieve the information – either the actual

information or the documents containing the information – that fully or partially

match the user’s query. The database may contain abstracts or full texts of

documents, such as newspaper articles, handbooks, dictionaries, encyclopedias,

legal documents, statistics and so on, as well as audio, images and video

information. Whatever the nature of the database may be – bibliographic, full-text or

multimedia – the system presupposes that there is a group of users for whom the

2

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL


system is designed. Users are considered to have certain queries or information

needs, and when they put forward their requirement to the system, the latter should

be able to provide the necessary bibliographic references of those documents

containing the required information; some systems also retrieve the actual text,

image, table or chart relevant to the information needs of the user. 

It will be easy to understand the basic functions of an information retrieval

system if we take the following simple example. Let us imagine that we want to find

information about a term, say ‘internet’, in a book. One approach would be to begin

with the first word in the first sentence in the book, and continue to look for the term

‘internet’ until we find it or we reach the end of the book. However, in real life, we

don’t do this. Instead, we use an index – the ‘back-of-the-book index’ – to look for

a match for the search term, and if we find a match then we take note of the

corresponding references – the page number(s) where the term occurs – and we

move to the specific page(s) to find the information. In their simplest form, most

information retrieval systems work in this way. 

Although historically information retrieval systems were designed to help people

find information from bibliographic and textual databases, in today’s world we use

information retrieval systems in almost every aspect of our daily lives, for example,

to retrieve a message or e-mail received or sent on a specific date; to find messages

sent to or by a particular person; to find something or someone on the web; to search

for a book in an online library catalogue or in a digital library; to search for a song

or to find a video on YouTube; and so on. The following are some typical activities

where we use information retrieval systems, in some form or other, in our day-to-

day life and activities:

► to search for information resources in a library’s online public access catalogue

(OPAC), which provides access to the library’s collections

► to search for information in online bibliographic or full-text databases (database

search services) such as Dialog (www.dialog.com), Ovid (www.ovid.com) or

ABI/Inform (www.proquest.com/products_pq/descriptions/abi_inform.shtml),

providing access to remote collections

► to access e-books and e-journal services such as NetLibrary

(www.netlibrary.com/), Emerald (www.emeraldinsight.com), and Ingenta

(www.ingenta.com), providing access to electronic books and journal articles

► to search for an e-mail address, a specific message, a phone number or an

address on a mobile phone or in e-mail services such as Outlook Express,

Gmail, or Eudora

► to search for information on institutional intranets and databases, such as those

created by companies and institutions providing access to various information

resources created within the institution

► to access information on websites either by going directly to the web page, by

entering the web address or Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of the site, or by

using tools such as search engines like Google (www.google.com); meta search

engines, which provide information from more than one search engine, such as

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  3


4

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

Dogpile (www.dogpile.com) and Mamma (www.mamma.com); specialty search

engines that use special techniques for search and/or display of results, such as

Clusty http://clusty.com) and Answers.com (www.answers.com); and directories

such as Yahoo! (www.Yahoo.com) 

► to access information on the web using subject gateways that provide access to

selected web resources in one or more specific discipline(s), such as Intute:

social sciences (www.intute.ac.uk/socialsciences), Intute: humanities

(www.intute.ac.uk/humanities) and Intute: medicine including dentistry

(www.intute.ac.uk/medicine) 

► to access information in digital libraries, such as the American Computing

Machinery (ACM) digital library (http://portal.acm.org/dl.cfm), the New

Zealand Digital Library (NZDL; www.nzdl.org) and the Networked Digital

Library of Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD; www.ndltd.org) 

► to search for music on iTunes

► to search for information on social networking sites such as Facebook, Twitter

and YouTube.

Elements of an information retrieval system

Figure 1.1 shows that an information retrieval system may comprise one or more

different types of documents and can contain text as well as multimedia information.

All the documents are processed to create an index, which is searched for retrieval

of information. In its most simple form, this index can be considered as a back-of-

Figure 1.1 Broad outline of an IRS

Content storage in one or more locations

National and global developments: technology, regulations, economy

Tools,

standards

Results

User

Query

Appropriateness, relevance

Search

interface

Retrieval

Theories,

models

Books

Journals

Conferences

Theses

Multimedia

Data

Web pages

Content creators, producers

Society, Context, Culture, Practices

Patents,

standards

Index or

directory

of content

in one or

more

locations

Information retrieval system


the-book index, but in reality it is much more complex than that. Details of such

indexes appear in Chapter 6. Some information retrieval systems, especially some

web search tools (discussed in Chapter 18), use a directory, which is like a

hierarchical list of subjects used to map documents in a collection, and which require

users to browse through the directory to identify a preferred term or concept and

follow the links from there to access the mapped documents. Details and examples

of some web directories appear in Chapter 18. However, as in books, the actual

documents in an information retrieval system are kept separately from the index, and

it is the index that is used for an information search. Figure 1.1 shows that it is a

rather complex process to create an index, and various tools, techniques and

standards are used for the purpose. In information retrieval systems the documents

and index may be located in one or more places in order to facilitate fast access and

easy maintenance of the document and the index databases.

Users interact with information retrieval systems through an interface where they

are usually expected to express their information needs in the form of a query, which

is presented to the search system through a search expression that may contain one

or more search terms presented in the form of a natural language sentence, or in a

constrained natural language where search terms are linked with various search

operators (details of query language and search operators appear in Chapter 9). 

Information is retrieved (usually in the form of documents that contain the

required information) whenever the search terms match the index terms; several

information retrieval models and theories have been developed over the past five or

so decades which are used for matching and retrieval. Details of these models appear

in Chapter 9.

As may be noted from Figure 1.1, information search and retrieval processes are

very much influenced by the concepts of appropriateness and relevance. One of the

major problems that information retrieval systems based on query formulation face

is that often users cannot express their information needs in the form of queries, and

cannot pass them to the search system through appropriate search statements.

Therefore, however sophisticated an indexing and retrieval system may be, the

overall performance of the information retrieval system may not be satisfactory to

users because some users do not make appropriate search statements. Again, the

success of an information retrieval system very much depends on the user’s

judgement of whether retrieved documents are relevant to their query (which may or

may not be a true reflection of an information need in the first instance). Therefore,

information needs vis-à-vis query formulation and relevance judgement are a major

area of study and research in information retrieval. 

The box on the extreme right in Figure 1.1 shows that users, their information

needs, information search behaviour, relevance judgements and so on can be

influenced by a number of factors that are outside the realm of a specific information

retrieval system, but are nonetheless very important – society, context, culture and

practices – which all have an effect on users and their information-seeking and

retrieval activities. This is an important area of study and research, details of which

appear in Chapters 10 and 11. 

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  5


Overall, the entire information retrieval system – the technical as well as the

social and human aspects – are influenced significantly by several external factors

including national and global developments in technology, regulations and the

economy, and indeed these influences can be clearly seen through the development

of information retrieval over the past 50 or so years since the introduction of

computers in information retrieval, and more so over the past one and a half decades

since the advent of the internet and the web. 

Purpose

An information retrieval system is designed to retrieve the documents or information

required by the user community. It should make the right information available to

the right user. Thus, an information retrieval system aims to collect and organize

information in one or more subject areas in order to provide it to users as soon as

they ask for it. Belkin4 describes how information retrieval systems are used in the

following way:

► A writer presents a set of ideas in a document using a set of concepts.

► Somewhere there are users who require the ideas but may not be able to

identify them; in other words, some people lack the ideas put forward by the

author in their work.

► Information retrieval systems match the writer’s ideas expressed in the

document with the users’ requirements or demands for them.

Thus, an information retrieval system serves as a bridge between the world of

creators or generators of information and the users of that information. Hence some

researchers comment that information retrieval is a communication process.5

Functions

An information retrieval system deals with various sources of information on the one

hand and users’ requirements on the other. It must:

► analyse the contents of the sources of information as well as the users’ queries,

and then 

► match these to retrieve those items that are relevant. 

Information retrieval systems have the following functions:

► to identify the information (sources) relevant to the areas of interest of the

target users’ community; this is a challenging job especially in the web

6

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL


environment where virtually everybody in the world can be the potential user of

a web-based information retrieval system

► to analyse the contents of the sources (documents); this is becoming

increasingly challenging as the size, volume and variety of information sources

(documents) is increasing rapidly; web information retrieval is carried out

automatically using specially designed programs called spiders (discussed in

Chapter 18)

► to represent the contents of analysed sources in a way that matches users’

queries; this is done by automatically creating one or more index files, and is

becoming an increasingly complex task due to the volume and variety of

content and increasing user demands 

► to analyse users’ queries and represent them in a form that will be suitable for

matching the database; this is done in a number of ways, through the design of

sophisticated search interfaces including those that can provide some help to

users for selection of appropriate search terms by using dictionary and thesauri,

automatic spell checkers, a predefined set of search statements and so forth

► to match the search statement with the stored database; a number of complex

information retrieval models have been developed over the years that are used

to determine the similarity of the query and stored documents

► to retrieve relevant information; a variety of tools and techniques are used to

determine the relevance of retrieved items and their ranking

► to make continuous changes in all aspects of the system, keeping in mind the

rapid developments in information and communication technologies (ICTs)

relating to changing patterns of society, users and their information needs and

expectations.

Components

It is evident from the above discussion that on the one side of an information

retrieval system there are the documents or sources of information and on the other

there are the users’ queries. These two sides are linked through a series of tasks.

Lancaster6 mentions that an information retrieval system comprises six major

subsystems:

► the document subsystem

► the indexing subsystem

► the vocabulary subsystem

► the searching subsystem

► the user-system interface

► the matching subsystem.

All the tasks mentioned in Figure 1.1 can be brought under two major groups –

subject/content analysis, and search and retrieval. Subject or content analysis

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  7


includes the tasks related to the analysis, organization and storage of information.

The process of search and retrieval includes the tasks of analysing users’ queries,

creation of a search formula, the actual searching and retrieval of information. The

major emphasis of this book is laid on these two areas. Researchers in the

information retrieval world are engaged in developing suitable methodologies for

both sets of operations. Developments in the technological world, especially in

computer and communication technologies, have provided an additional impetus to

the development of information retrieval systems. Researchers who are working on

the storage side of the information retrieval system are engaged in designing

sophisticated methods for identification and representation of the various

bibliographic elements essential for documents, automatic content analysis, text

processing and so on. On the other hand, researchers working on the retrieval side

are attempting to develop sophisticated searching techniques, user interfaces, and

various techniques for producing output for local as well as remote users. The recent

emergence of the internet, particularly the world wide web (discussed in Chapter

18), has made a significant impact on the information retrieval environment.

Kinds of information retrieval systems

Information retrieval systems can be categorized in a number of ways. For example,

one can group them into two categories: in-house and online. 

In-house information retrieval systems are set up by a particular library or

information centre to serve mainly the users within the organization. One particular

type of in-house database is the library catalogue. OPACs provide facilities for

library users to carry out online catalogue searches and to then check the availability

of the item required. 

By online information retrieval systems we mean those that have been designed

to provide access to a remote database(s) to a variety of users. These are mostly

commercial services, and there are a number of vendors that handle them. With the

development of optical storage technology another type of information retrieval

system appeared on CD-ROM (compact-disc read-only memory). Information

retrieval systems based on CD-ROM technology are mostly commercial services,

though there have been some free and in-house developments too. Basic techniques

for search and retrieval of information from the in-house or CD-ROM and online

information retrieval systems are more or less the same, except that the online

system is linked to users at a distance through the electronic communication

network. 

Another, and perhaps more appropriate, grouping could be made on the basis of

the content, purpose and functions of information retrieval systems. In this approach

four distinct types of information retrieval systems can be identified: 

► OPACs

► online databases

8

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL


► digital libraries and web-based information services

► web search engines.

OPACs demonstrate some typical and limited features of information retrieval

systems, which are designed for keeping in view the nature of the documents that

they handle as well as the user and their specific purpose for the information search.

OPACs typically allow users to search by using typical bibliographic keys such as

authors’ names, titles of documents, subject descriptors and keywords, and at the end

of a search they produce a list of documents, with some bibliographic information

and a call number (an artificial number often comprising several alphanumeric

characters and punctuations), the latter being the link between the retrieved

documents and their physical location in the library. These information retrieval

systems usually have less sophisticated search and retrieval features than other

categories of information retrieval systems. 

Online information retrieval systems appeared in the early era of computer

applications in information retrieval, and over the past five decades these systems

have gone through several improvements in their search and retrieval features.

Examples of typical online information retrieval systems include those that are

available through various search service providers – companies that provide access

to remote text and other types of databases – such as Dialog, Ovid and Factiva.

These information retrieval systems are designed to work on many large live

databases comprising millions of documents, and they provide very attractive

information search and retrieval features. A unique characteristic of these systems,

as opposed to other online services, specifically the web search engines, is that they

are fee- or subscription-based services, and they provide access to peer reviewed,

quality, often scholarly, information sources. 

Recent developments in information and communication technologies have

widened the scope of online information retrieval systems. The internet and world

wide web have made information available for use by anyone virtually anywhere

who has access to the appropriate equipment. This has led to the development of

several digital libraries and web-based information services that can be accessed

remotely through a web interface. These information retrieval systems are different

from the typical online information retrieval systems, described in the previous

paragraph, in that often they are free and can be accessed by virtually anyone

through the web.

The web has given birth to another category of information retrieval system,

which is unique and quite different from the three other categories of information

retrieval systems discussed above. These are the web search engines that are

designed to provide access to vast amounts of web information resources. These

information retrieval systems have some typical characteristics – they are robust,

designed only to enable the users to find web resources; they do not guarantee access

to the resources they retrieve but, perhaps most importantly, they are free at the point

of use. 

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  9


Design issues

A system can be defined as a set of interacting components, under human control,

operating together to achieve an intended purpose. Thus a system carries out

processing on inputs to produce required outputs; the agents of this processing are

people and machines.6, 7, 8, 9

System design may be viewed as a series of choices from which the designer

selects each element and tries to fit it with the proposed objective of the system.

Therefore, if a system is designed carefully, the designer must be aware of the

choices that are to be made, and he or she must consider the consequences of making

any available choice. The life-cycle approach to system design suggests the

following basic stages in the life of a system:10

1 An analysis has to be conducted in order to establish the requirements of a

system, and to learn the various options available.

2 Next comes the design phase, which eventually gives rise to a specific system

to match the requirements.

3 Next comes the implementation stage, which leads into the operating evolution

during which the system fulfils its objectives and is modified from time to time

to match the minor changes in requirements.

4 Eventually the system becomes less effective, for a number of reasons including

mechanical faults, arrival of new technologies and major changes in the

requirements and in the environment. This stage leads to decay, which finally

leads to replacement of the system – starting at step 1 again.

Liston and Schoene11 suggest that an effective information retrieval system must

have provisions for:

► prompt dissemination of information

► filtering of information

► providing the right amount of information at the right time

► active switching of information

► receiving information in the desired form

► browsing

► getting information in an economical way

► current literature

► providing access to other information systems

► interpersonal communication

► offering personalized help.

These requirements have become even more essential for success in today’s web-

based information retrieval environment. 

Liston and Schoene also talk about how an information retrieval system should

be user-oriented, giving primary emphasis to the convenience of the users. Although

10

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL


this principle has played a key role in the progress of information retrieval, as can

be evidenced through the different generations of OPACs and online information

retrieval systems, this has become a much more challenging endeavour in the web

and digital library environment since the users are remote, and the same information

may be required by different users with different characteristics, coming from

different locations, cultures and contexts. As a result different approaches and

practices may be noticed in different modern information retrieval systems. For

example, online database service providers such as Dialog, Ovid, Factiva and CSA

have taken various user-centred approaches in their search and retrieval features;

examples appear in Chapter 15. Similarly, several specific measures can also be

noticed in the information retrieval systems in some digital libraries. 

The text retrieval conference (TREC) series of experiments and conferences have

been a major platform for advancement of information retrieval research and

development activities. Details of TREC experiments, results and commentaries are

available on the TREC website and several publications (see for example Voorhees

and Harman12 and Sparck Jones13) and these are discussed later in this book. 

Information retrieval research and development activities have advanced rapidly

over the past few years as a result of the appearance of web and web search engines.

Information retrieval, which was once the interest and concern of only a select few

– experts and professionals – is now used by everyone for accessing information on

the web. Credit must go to web search engines for investing significant amounts of

effort and available resources for developing and improving information retrieval

systems so that people can get easier and better access to information on the web.

Another major contribution of web search engines is the simplification of the search

interface and the interaction process. Information retrieval search interfaces that

were earlier designed for expert and educated users have now become much simpler

and intuitive and can be used by anyone without any specific knowledge of

information retrieval techniques or the subject domain. Details of the developments

of search interfaces, especially web search interfaces, have been discussed by

Hearst.14

Discussion

Developments in information retrieval can be viewed from two different

perspectives: 

► the computer-centred view, which deals with building efficient computer

systems for storage, organization and access to information, and focuses on

areas such as building up efficient access mechanisms, query processing,

ranking algorithms and display and delivery of search results

► the user-centred view, which focuses on the study of human information

behaviour, understanding of human needs, information context and use, and so

on. 

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  11


This book aims to focus on both these views of information retrieval, since

successful information retrieval systems should take both views into account. It also

covers the broader scope of information retrieval that ranges from library OPACs to

the web and digital libraries. Alongside the latest developments in computerized

information retrieval, this book discusses the traditional library tools and techniques,

such as classification, cataloguing and vocabulary control, as well as the traditional

manual indexing systems. It is believed that today’s information professionals

should know about these traditional tools and techniques because of at least two

reasons. First, they show the process of the evolution of information retrieval, from

the shelf to the web; second, many recent developments in information retrieval in

web and digital library environments have their roots, explicitly or implicitly, in

traditional bibliographic tools and techniques. In some cases the wheel has been re-

invented, perhaps because inventors were not aware of the tools and techniques built

and used by libraries over a long period for organization and access to information

resources. Major topics covered in this book include:

► organization and processing of information – bibliographic formats,

cataloguing, metadata, classification and indexing, vocabulary control

► information retrieval techniques and models

► database and information retrieval systems, online search services

► user interfaces

► information users, human information behaviour and information seeking and

retrieval models

► information retrieval evaluation 

► markup languages, Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) and XML retrieval

► web information retrieval, digital libraries

► natural language processing, intelligent information retrieval systems

► information retrieval research trends.

References

1 

Sparck Jones, K. and Willett, P., Overall Introduction. In Sparck Jones, K. and Willett,

P. (eds) Readings in Information Retrieval, San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Pub.

Inc., 1997, 1–7.

2 

Parsaye, K., Chignell, M., Khosafian, S. and Wong, H., Intelligent Databases: object-

oriented, deductive hypermedia technologies, New York, John Wiley, 1989.

3 

Lancaster, F. W., Information Retrieval Systems, New York, John Wiley, 1968. 

4 

Belkin, N. J., Anomalous States of Knowledge as a Basis for Information Retrieval,

Canadian Journal of Information Science, 5, 1980, 133–43.

5 

Meadow, C. T., Boyce, B. R., Kraft, D. H. and Barry, C., Text Information Retrieval

Systems, 3rd edn, London, Academic Press, 2007. 

6 

Lancaster, F. W., Information Retrieval Systems: characteristics, testing, and

evaluation, 2nd edn, New York, John Wiley, 1979.

12

INTRODUCTION TO MODERN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL


7 Kent, A., Information Analysis and Retrieval, 3rd edn, New York, Becker and Heys,

1971.

8 Vickery, B. C., Techniques of Information Retrieval, London, Butterworth, 1970.

9 Vickery, B. and Vickery, A., Information Science Theory and Practice, London,

Bowker-Saur, 1987.

10 Rowley, J., The Basics of Information Systems, 2nd edn, London, Library Association

Publishing, 1996.

11 Liston, D. M. and Schoene, M. L., A Systems Approach to the Design of Information

Systems. In King, D. W. (ed.) Key Papers in the Design and Evaluation of Information

Systems, New York, Knowledge Industry, 1978, 327–34.

12 Voorhees, E. and Harman, D. (eds), Text REtrieval Conference, Cambridge, MA, MIT

Press, 2005.

13 Sparck Jones, K., What’s the Value of TREC: is there a gap to jump or a chasm to

bridge? SIGIR Forum, 40 (1), 2006, 10–20.

14 Hearst, M., Search User Interfaces, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2009.

BASIC CONCEPTS OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS  13

