
next up previous contents index 

Next: Language modeling versus other Up: The query likelihood model Previous: Estimating the query generation Contents Index 

Ponte and Croft's Experiments



Ponte and Croft (1998) present the first experiments on the language modeling approach to information retrieval. Their basic approach is the

model that we have presented until now. However, we have presented an approach where the language model is a mixture of two multinomials,

much as in (Miller et al., 1999, Hiemstra, 2000) rather than Ponte and Croft's multivariate Bernoulli model. The use of multinomials has been

standard in most subsequent work in the LM approach and experimental results in IR, as well as evidence from text classification which we

consider in Section 13.3 (page 

), suggests that it is superior. Ponte and Croft argued strongly for the effectiveness of the term weights that come

from the language modeling approach over traditional tf-idf weights. We present a subset of their results in Figure 12.4 where they compare tf-idf

to language modeling by evaluating TREC topics 202-250 over TREC disks 2 and 3. The queries are sentence-length natural language queries.

The language modeling approach yields significantly better results than their baseline tf-idf based term weighting approach. And indeed the gains

shown here have been extended in subsequent work.

Exercises.

Consider making a language model from the following training text:

the martian has landed on the latin pop sensation ricky martin

1. Under a MLE-estimated unigram probability model, what are 



 and 



?

2. Under a MLE-estimated bigram model, what are 



 and 



?

Suppose we have a collection that consists of the 4 documents given in the below table.

docID Document text

1

click go the shears boys click click click

2

click click

3

metal here

4

metal shears click here

Build a query likelihood language model for this document collection. Assume a mixture model between the documents and the collection,

with both weighted at 0.5. Maximum likelihood estimation (mle) is used to estimate both as unigram models. Work out the model

probabilities of the queries click, shears, and hence click shears for each document, and use those probabilities to rank the documents

returned by each query. Fill in these probabilities in the below table:

Query

Doc 1 Doc 2 Doc 3 Doc 4


click

 

 

 

 

shears

 

 

 

 

click shears  

 

 

 

What is the final ranking of the documents for the query click shears?

Using the calculations in Exercise 12.2.3 as inspiration or as examples where appropriate, write one sentence each describing the treatment

that the model in Equation 102 gives to each of the following quantities. Include whether it is present in the model or not and whether the

effect is raw or scaled.

1. Term frequency in a document

2. Collection frequency of a term

3. Document frequency of a term

4. Length normalization of a term

In the mixture model approach to the query likelihood model (Equation 104), the probability estimate of a term is based on the term

frequency of a word in a document, and the collection frequency of the word. Doing this certainly guarantees that each term of a query (in

the vocabulary) has a non-zero chance of being generated by each document. But it has a more subtle but important effect of implementing a

form of term weighting, related to what we saw in Chapter 6 . Explain how this works. In particular, include in your answer a concrete

numeric example showing this term weighting at work.

next up previous contents index 

Next: Language modeling versus other Up: The query likelihood model Previous: Estimating the query generation Contents Index

© 2008 Cambridge University Press

This is an automatically generated page. In case of formatting errors you may want to look at the PDF edition of the book.

2009-04-07

