
Entropy

Toggle the table of contents



 85

languages

Article

Talk

Tools

Entropy

Common symbols S

SI unit

joules per kelvin (J⋅K−1)

In SI base units

kg⋅m2⋅s−2⋅K−1

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

For other uses, see Entropy (disambiguation).

Thermodynamics



The classical Carnot heat engine

Branches

Classical · Statistical · Chemical · Quantum thermodynamics

Equilibrium / Non-equilibrium

Laws

Zeroth · First · Second · Third

Systems

Closed system

Open system

Isolated system

State

Equation of state · Ideal gas · Real gas · State of matter · Phase (matter) · Equilibrium · Control volume · Instruments

Processes

Isobaric · Isochoric · Isothermal · Adiabatic · Isentropic · Isenthalpic · Quasistatic · Polytropic · Free expansion · Reversibility · Irreversibility ·

Endoreversibility

Cycles

Heat engines · Heat pumps · Thermal efficiency

System properties

Note: Conjugate variables in italics

Property diagrams

Intensive and extensive properties

Process functions

Work · Heat

Functions of state

Temperature / Entropy (introduction)

Pressure / Volume

Chemical potential / Particle number

Vapor quality

Reduced properties








Material properties

Property databases

Specific heat capacity 

Compressibility 

Thermal expansion 

Equations

Carnot's theorem · Clausius theorem · Fundamental relation · Ideal gas law

Maxwell relations

Onsager reciprocal relations

Bridgman's equations

Table of thermodynamic equations

Potentials

Free energy · Free entropy

Internal energy

Enthalpy

Helmholtz free energy

Gibbs free energy

History · Culture

History

General · Entropy · Gas laws

"Perpetual motion" machines

Philosophy

Entropy and time · Entropy and life · Brownian ratchet · Maxwell's demon · Heat death paradox · Loschmidt's paradox · Synergetics

Theories

Caloric theory

Vis viva ("living force")

Mechanical equivalent of heat

Motive power

Key publications

An Experimental Enquiry

Concerning ... Heat

On the Equilibrium of

Heterogeneous Substances

Reflections on the

Motive Power of Fire

Timelines

Thermodynamics · Heat engines

Art · Education

Maxwell's thermodynamic surface

Entropy as energy dispersal

Scientists

Bernoulli · Boltzmann · Bridgman · Carathéodory · Carnot · Clapeyron · Clausius · de Donder · Duhem · Gibbs · von Helmholtz · Joule · Lewis · Massieu ·

Maxwell · von Mayer · Nernst · Onsager · Planck · Rankine · Smeaton · Stahl · Tait · Thompson · Thomson · van der Waals · Waterston

Other

Nucleation

Self-assembly

Self-organization

Order and disorder



 Category

v · t · e

Entropy articles

Introduction · History · Classical entropy · Statistical entropy

v · t · e

Entropy is a scientific concept, as well as a measurable physical property, that is most commonly associated with a state of disorder,




Rudolf Clausius (1822–

1888), originator of the

concept of entropy

randomness, or uncertainty. The term and the concept are used in diverse fields, from classical thermodynamics, where it was first

recognized, to the microscopic description of nature in statistical physics, and to the principles of information theory. It has found far-

ranging applications in chemistry and physics, in biological systems and their relation to life, in cosmology, economics, sociology,

weather science, climate change, and information systems including the transmission of information in telecommunication.[1]

The thermodynamic concept was referred to by Scottish scientist and engineer William Rankine in 1850 with the names thermodynamic

function and heat-potential.[2] In 1865, German physicist Rudolf Clausius, one of the leading founders of the field of thermodynamics,

defined it as the quotient of an infinitesimal amount of heat to the instantaneous temperature. He initially described it as

transformation-content, in German Verwandlungsinhalt, and later coined the term entropy from a Greek word for transformation.

Referring to microscopic constitution and structure, in 1862, Clausius interpreted the concept as meaning disgregation.[3]

A consequence of entropy is that certain processes are irreversible or impossible, aside from the requirement of not violating the

conservation of energy, the latter being expressed in the first law of thermodynamics. Entropy is central to the second law of

thermodynamics, which states that the entropy of isolated systems left to spontaneous evolution cannot decrease with time, as they

always arrive at a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, where the entropy is highest.

Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann explained entropy as the measure of the number of possible microscopic arrangements or states

of individual atoms and molecules of a system that comply with the macroscopic condition of the system. He thereby introduced the

concept of statistical disorder and probability distributions into a new field of thermodynamics, called statistical mechanics, and found

the link between the microscopic interactions, which fluctuate about an average configuration, to the macroscopically observable

behavior, in form of a simple logarithmic law, with a proportionality constant, the Boltzmann constant, that has become one of the

defining universal constants for the modern International System of Units (SI).

In 1948, Bell Labs scientist Claude Shannon developed similar statistical concepts of measuring microscopic uncertainty and

multiplicity to the problem of random losses of information in telecommunication signals. Upon John von Neumann's suggestion,

Shannon named this entity of missing information in analogous manner to its use in statistical mechanics as entropy, and gave birth to

the field of information theory. This description has been identified as a universal definition of the concept of entropy.[4]

History [edit]

Main article: History of entropy

In his 1803 paper Fundamental Principles of Equilibrium and Movement, the French mathematician

Lazare Carnot proposed that in any machine, the accelerations and shocks of the moving parts

represent losses of moment of activity; in any natural process there exists an inherent tendency

towards the dissipation of useful energy. In 1824, building on that work, Lazare's son, Sadi Carnot,

published Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire, which posited that in all heat-engines, whenever

"caloric" (what is now known as heat) falls through a temperature difference, work or motive power can

be produced from the actions of its fall from a hot to cold body. He used an analogy with how water falls

in a water wheel. That was an early insight into the second law of thermodynamics.[5] Carnot based his

views of heat partially on the early 18th-century "Newtonian hypothesis" that both heat and light were

types of indestructible forms of matter, which are attracted and repelled by other matter, and partially

on the contemporary views of Count Rumford, who showed in 1789 that heat could be created by

friction, as when cannon bores are machined.[6] Carnot reasoned that if the body of the working

substance, such as a body of steam, is returned to its original state at the end of a complete engine

cycle, "no change occurs in the condition of the working body".

The first law of thermodynamics, deduced from the heat-friction experiments of James Joule in 1843, expresses the concept of energy

and its conservation in all processes; the first law, however, is unsuitable to separately quantify the effects of friction and dissipation.

In the 1850s and 1860s, German physicist Rudolf Clausius objected to the supposition that no change occurs in the working body, and

gave that change a mathematical interpretation, by questioning the nature of the inherent loss of usable heat when work is done, e.g.,

heat produced by friction.[7] He described his observations as a dissipative use of energy, resulting in a transformation-content

(Verwandlungs inhalt in German), of a thermodynamic system or working body of chemical species during a change of state.[7] That

was in contrast to earlier views, based on the theories of Isaac Newton, that heat was an indestructible particle that had mass. Clausius

discovered that the non-usable energy increases as steam proceeds from inlet to exhaust in a steam engine. From the prefix en-, as in

'energy', and from the Greek word τροπή [tropē], which is translated in an established lexicon as turning or change[8] and that he

rendered in German as Verwandlung, a word often translated into English as transformation, in 1865 Clausius coined the name of that

property as entropy.[9] The word was adopted into the English language in 1868.

Later, scientists such as Ludwig Boltzmann, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and James Clerk Maxwell gave entropy a statistical basis. In 1877,

Boltzmann visualized a probabilistic way to measure the entropy of an ensemble of ideal gas particles, in which he defined entropy as

proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of microstates such a gas could occupy. The proportionality constant in this

definition, called the Boltzmann constant, has become one of the defining universal constants for the modern International System of

Units (SI). Henceforth, the essential problem in statistical thermodynamics has been to determine the distribution of a given amount of


energy E over N identical systems. Constantin Carathéodory, a Greek mathematician, linked entropy with a mathematical definition of

irreversibility, in terms of trajectories and integrability.

Etymology [edit]

In 1865, Clausius named the concept of "the differential of a quantity which depends on the configuration of the system", entropy

(Entropie) after the Greek word for 'transformation'.[10] He gave "transformational content" (Verwandlungsinhalt) as a synonym,

paralleling his "thermal and ergonal content" (Wärme- und Werkinhalt) as the name of , but preferring the term entropy as a close

parallel of the word energy, as he found the concepts nearly "analogous in their physical significance".[10] This term was formed by

replacing the root of ἔργον ('ergon', 'work') by that of τροπή ('tropy', 'transformation').[9]

In more detail, Clausius explained his choice of "entropy" as a name as follows:[11]

I prefer going to the ancient languages for the names of important scientific quantities, so that they may mean the same

thing in all living tongues. I propose, therefore, to call S the entropy of a body, after the Greek word "transformation". I have

designedly coined the word entropy to be similar to energy, for these two quantities are so analogous in their physical

significance, that an analogy of denominations seems to me helpful.

Leon Cooper added that in this way "he succeeded in coining a word that meant the same thing to everybody: nothing".[11]

Definitions and descriptions [edit]

Any method involving the notion of entropy, the very existence of which depends on the second law of thermodynamics, will doubtless seem to many far-

fetched, and may repel beginners as obscure and difficult of comprehension.

Willard Gibbs, Graphical Methods in the Thermodynamics of Fluids[12]

The concept of entropy is described by two principal approaches, the macroscopic perspective of classical thermodynamics, and the

microscopic description central to statistical mechanics. The classical approach defines entropy in terms of macroscopically

measurable physical properties, such as bulk mass, volume, pressure, and temperature. The statistical definition of entropy defines it

in terms of the statistics of the motions of the microscopic constituents of a system – modeled at first classically, e.g. Newtonian

particles constituting a gas, and later quantum-mechanically (photons, phonons, spins, etc.). The two approaches form a consistent,

unified view of the same phenomenon as expressed in the second law of thermodynamics, which has found universal applicability to

physical processes.

State variables and functions of state [edit]

Many thermodynamic properties are defined by physical variables that define a state of thermodynamic equilibrium; these are state

variables. State variables depend only on the equilibrium condition, not on the path evolution to that state. State variables can be

functions of state, also called state functions, in a sense that one state variable is a mathematical function of other state variables.

Often, if some properties of a system are determined, they are sufficient to determine the state of the system and thus other

properties' values. For example, temperature and pressure of a given quantity of gas determine its state, and thus also its volume via

the ideal gas law. A system composed of a pure substance of a single phase at a particular uniform temperature and pressure is

determined, and is thus a particular state, and has not only a particular volume but also a specific entropy.[13] The fact that entropy is a

function of state makes it useful. In the Carnot cycle, the working fluid returns to the same state that it had at the start of the cycle,

hence the change or line integral of any state function, such as entropy, over this reversible cycle is zero.

Reversible process [edit]

Total entropy may be conserved during a reversible process. The entropy change  of the system (not including the surroundings) is

well-defined as heat 

 transferred to the system divided by the system temperature , 

. A reversible process is a quasistatic

one that deviates only infinitesimally from thermodynamic equilibrium and avoids friction or other dissipation. Any process that happens

quickly enough to deviate from thermal equilibrium cannot be reversible, total entropy increases, and the potential for maximum work to

be done in the process is also lost.[14] For example, in the Carnot cycle, while the heat flow from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir

represents an increase in entropy, the work output, if reversibly and perfectly stored in some energy storage mechanism, represents a

decrease in entropy that could be used to operate the heat engine in reverse and return to the previous state; thus the total entropy

change may still be zero at all times if the entire process is reversible. An irreversible process increases the total entropy of system

and surroundings.[15]

Carnot cycle [edit]

The concept of entropy arose from Rudolf Clausius's study of the Carnot cycle that is a thermodynamic cycle performed by a Carnot

heat engine as a reversible heat engine.[16] In a Carnot cycle, heat QH is absorbed isothermally at temperature TH from a 'hot'


reservoir (in the isothermal expansion stage) and given up isothermally as heat QC to a 'cold' reservoir at TC (in the isothermal

compression stage). According to Carnot's principle or theorem, work from a heat engine with two thermal reservoirs can be produced

only when there is a temperature difference between these reservoirs, and for reversible engines which are mostly and equally efficient

among all heat engines for a given thermal reservoir pair, the work is a function of the reservoir temperatures and the heat absorbed

to the engine QH (heat engine work output = heat engine efficiency × heat to the engine, where the efficiency is a function of the

reservoir temperatures for reversible heat engines). Carnot did not distinguish between QH and QC, since he was using the incorrect

hypothesis that caloric theory was valid, and hence heat was conserved (the incorrect assumption that QH and QC were equal in

magnitude) when, in fact, QH is greater than the magnitude of QC in magnitude.[17][18] Through the efforts of Clausius and Kelvin, it is

now known that the work done by a reversible heat engine is the product of the Carnot efficiency (it is the efficiency of all reversible

heat engines with the same thermal reservoir pairs according to the Carnot's theorem) and the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir:

 

 

 

 

(1)

Here  is work done by the Carnot heat engine, 

 is heat to the engine from the hot reservoir, and 

 is heat to the cold reservoir

from the engine. To derive the Carnot efficiency, which is 1 − TC/TH (a number less than one), Kelvin had to evaluate the ratio of the

work output to the heat absorbed during the isothermal expansion with the help of the Carnot–Clapeyron equation, which contained an

unknown function called the Carnot function. The possibility that the Carnot function could be the temperature as measured from a

zero point of temperature was suggested by Joule in a letter to Kelvin. This allowed Kelvin to establish his absolute temperature

scale.[19] It is also known that the net work W produced by the system in one cycle is the net heat absorbed, which is the sum (or

difference of the magnitudes) of the heat QH &gt; 0 absorbed from the hot reservoir and the waste heat QC &lt; 0 given off to the cold

reservoir:[20]

 

 

 

 

(2)

Since the latter is valid over the entire cycle, this gave Clausius the hint that at each stage of the cycle, work and heat would not be

equal, but rather their difference would be the change of a state function that would vanish upon completion of the cycle. The state

function was called the internal energy, that is central to the first law of thermodynamics.[21]

Now equating (1) and (2) gives, for the engine per Carnot cycle,[22][20]

 

 

 

 

(3)

This implies that there is a function of state whose change is Q/T and this state function is conserved over a complete Carnot cycle,

like other state function such as the internal energy. Clausius called this state function entropy. One can see that entropy was

discovered through mathematics rather than through laboratory experimental results.[citation needed] It is a mathematical construct and

has no easy physical analogy.[citation needed] This makes the concept somewhat obscure or abstract, akin to how the concept of energy

arose.



The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove

this message until conditions to do so are met. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

This equation shows an entropy change per Carnot cycle is zero. In fact, an entropy change in the both thermal reservoirs per Carnot

cycle is also zero since that change is simply expressed by reverting the sign of each term in the equation (3) according to the fact

that, for example, for heat transfer from the hot reservoir to the engine, the engine receives the heat while the hot reservoir loses the

same amount of the heat;

 

 

 

 

(4)

where we denote an entropy change for a thermal reservoir by ΔSr,i = - Qi/Ti, for i as either H (Hot reservoir) or C (Cold reservoir), by

considering the above-mentioned signal convention of heat for the engine.

Clausius then asked what would happen if less work is produced by the system than that predicted by Carnot's principle for the same

thermal reservoir pair and the same heat transfer from the hot reservoir to the engine QH. In this case, the right-hand side of the

equation (1) would be the upper bound of the work output by the system, and the equation would now be converted into an inequality

When the equation (2) is used to express the work as a net or total heat exchanged in a cycle, we get

or


by considering the sign convention of heat where QH &gt; 0 is heat that is from the hot reservoir and is absorbed by the engine and QC &lt;

0 is the waste heat given off to the cold reservoir from the engine. So, more heat is given up to the cold reservoir than in the Carnot

cycle. The above inequality 

 can be written as

If we, again, denote an entropy change for a thermal reservoir by ΔSr,i = - Qi/Ti, for i as either H (Hot reservoir) or C (Cold reservoir),

by considering the abovementioned signal convention of heat for the engine, then

or

 

 

 

 

(5)

telling that the magnitude of the entropy earned by the cold reservoir is greater than the entropy lost by the hot reservoir. The net

entropy change in the engine per its thermodynamic cycle is zero, so the net entropy change in the engine and both the thermal

reservoirs per cycle increases if work produced by the engine is less than the work achieved by a Carnot engine in the equation (1).

The Carnot cycle and Carnot efficiency as shown in the equation (1) are useful because they define the upper bound of the possible

work output and the efficiency of any classical thermodynamic heat engine. Other cycles, such as the Otto cycle, Diesel cycle and

Brayton cycle, can be analyzed from the standpoint of the Carnot cycle. Any machine or cyclic process that converts heat to work and

is claimed to produce an efficiency greater than the Carnot efficiency is not viable because it violates the second law of

thermodynamics.

For very small numbers of particles in the system, statistical thermodynamics must be used. The efficiency of devices such as

photovoltaic cells requires an analysis from the standpoint of quantum mechanics.

Classical thermodynamics [edit]

Main article: Entropy (classical thermodynamics)

Conjugate variables

of thermodynamics

Pressure

Volume

(Stress)

(Strain)

Temperature

Entropy

Chemical potential

Particle number

The thermodynamic definition of entropy was developed in the early 1850s by Rudolf Clausius and essentially describes how to

measure the entropy of an isolated system in thermodynamic equilibrium with its parts. Clausius created the term entropy as an

extensive thermodynamic variable that was shown to be useful in characterizing the Carnot cycle. Heat transfer in the isotherm steps

(isothermal expansion and isothermal compression) of the Carnot cycle was found to be proportional to the temperature of a system

(known as its absolute temperature). This relationship was expressed in an increment of entropy that is equal to incremental heat

transfer divided by temperature. Entropy was found to vary in the thermodynamic cycle but eventually returned to the same value at

the end of every cycle. Thus it was found to be a function of state, specifically a thermodynamic state of the system.

While Clausius based his definition on a reversible process, there are also irreversible processes that change entropy. Following the

second law of thermodynamics, entropy of an isolated system always increases for irreversible processes. The difference between an

isolated system and closed system is that energy may not flow to and from an isolated system, but energy flow to and from a closed

system is possible. Nevertheless, for both closed and isolated systems, and indeed, also in open systems, irreversible thermodynamics

processes may occur.

According to the Clausius equality, for a reversible cyclic process: 

. This means the line integral 

 is path-independent.

So we can define a state function S called entropy, which satisfies 

.

To find the entropy difference between any two states of a system, the integral must be evaluated for some reversible path between

the initial and final states.[23] Since entropy is a state function, the entropy change of the system for an irreversible path is the same as

for a reversible path between the same two states.[24] However, the heat transferred to or from, and the entropy change of, the

surroundings is different.

We can only obtain the change of entropy by integrating the above formula. To obtain the absolute value of the entropy, we need the

third law of thermodynamics, which states that S = 0 at absolute zero for perfect crystals.

From a macroscopic perspective, in classical thermodynamics the entropy is interpreted as a state function of a thermodynamic

system: that is, a property depending only on the current state of the system, independent of how that state came to be achieved. In

any process where the system gives up energy ΔE, and its entropy falls by ΔS, a quantity at least TR ΔS of that energy must be given

up to the system's surroundings as heat (TR is the temperature of the system's external surroundings). Otherwise the process cannot

go forward. In classical thermodynamics, the entropy of a system is defined only if it is in physical thermodynamic equilibrium. (But


chemical equilibrium is not required: the entropy of a mixture of two moles of hydrogen and one mole of oxygen at 1 bar pressure and

298 K is well-defined.)

Statistical mechanics [edit]

Main article: Entropy (statistical thermodynamics)

The statistical definition was developed by Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1870s by analyzing the statistical behavior of the microscopic

components of the system. Boltzmann showed that this definition of entropy was equivalent to the thermodynamic entropy to within a

constant factor—known as the Boltzmann constant. In short, the thermodynamic definition of entropy provides the experimental

verification of entropy, while the statistical definition of entropy extends the concept, providing an explanation and a deeper

understanding of its nature.

The interpretation of entropy in statistical mechanics is the measure of uncertainty, disorder, or mixedupness in the phrase of Gibbs,

which remains about a system after its observable macroscopic properties, such as temperature, pressure and volume, have been

taken into account. For a given set of macroscopic variables, the entropy measures the degree to which the probability of the system is

spread out over different possible microstates. In contrast to the macrostate, which characterizes plainly observable average

quantities, a microstate specifies all molecular details about the system including the position and velocity of every molecule. The more

such states are available to the system with appreciable probability, the greater the entropy. In statistical mechanics, entropy is a

measure of the number of ways a system can be arranged, often taken to be a measure of "disorder" (the higher the entropy, the

higher the disorder).[25][26][27] This definition describes the entropy as being proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of

possible microscopic configurations of the individual atoms and molecules of the system (microstates) that could cause the observed

macroscopic state (macrostate) of the system. The constant of proportionality is the Boltzmann constant.

The Boltzmann constant, and therefore entropy, have dimensions of energy divided by temperature, which has a unit of joules per

kelvin (J⋅K−1) in the International System of Units (or kg⋅m2⋅s−2⋅K−1 in terms of base units). The entropy of a substance is usually

given as an intensive property – either entropy per unit mass (SI unit: J⋅K−1⋅kg−1) or entropy per unit amount of substance (SI unit:

J⋅K−1⋅mol−1).

Specifically, entropy is a logarithmic measure of the number of system states with significant probability of being occupied:

(  is the probability that the system is in th state, usually given by the Boltzmann distribution; if states are defined in a continuous

manner, the summation is replaced by an integral over all possible states) or, equivalently, the expected value of the logarithm of the

probability that a microstate is occupied

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, equal to 1.380 65 ×10−23 J/K. The summation is over all the possible microstates of the system,

and pi is the probability that the system is in the i-th microstate.[28] This definition assumes that the basis set of states has been picked

so that there is no information on their relative phases. In a different basis set, the more general expression is

where  is the density matrix,  is trace, and  is the matrix logarithm. This density matrix formulation is not needed in cases of thermal

equilibrium so long as the basis states are chosen to be energy eigenstates. For most practical purposes, this can be taken as the

fundamental definition of entropy since all other formulas for S can be mathematically derived from it, but not vice versa.

In what has been called the fundamental assumption of statistical thermodynamics or the fundamental postulate in statistical

mechanics, among system microstates of the same energy (degenerate microstates) each microstate is assumed to be populated with

equal probability; this assumption is usually justified for an isolated system in equilibrium.[29] Then for an isolated system pi = 1/Ω,

where Ω is the number of microstates whose energy equals the system's energy, and the previous equation reduces to

In thermodynamics, such a system is one in which the volume, number of molecules, and internal energy are fixed (the microcanonical

ensemble).

For a given thermodynamic system, the excess entropy is defined as the entropy minus that of an ideal gas at the same density and

temperature, a quantity that is always negative because an ideal gas is maximally disordered.[30] This concept plays an important role

in liquid-state theory. For instance, Rosenfeld's excess-entropy scaling principle[31][32] states that reduced transport coefficients

throughout the two-dimensional phase diagram are functions uniquely determined by the excess entropy.[33][34]

The most general interpretation of entropy is as a measure of the extent of uncertainty about a system. The equilibrium state of a

system maximizes the entropy because it does not reflect all information about the initial conditions, except for the conserved variables.

This uncertainty is not of the everyday subjective kind, but rather the uncertainty inherent to the experimental method and

interpretative model.[35]

The interpretative model has a central role in determining entropy. The qualifier "for a given set of macroscopic variables" above has

deep implications: if two observers use different sets of macroscopic variables, they see different entropies. For example, if observer A




A thermodynamic system



A temperature–entropy diagram for

steam. The vertical axis represents

uniform temperature, and the horizontal

axis represents specific entropy. Each

dark line on the graph represents

constant pressure, and these form a

mesh with light gray lines of constant

volume. (Dark-blue is liquid water, light-

blue is liquid-steam mixture, and faint-

blue is steam. Grey-blue represents

supercritical liquid water.)

uses the variables U, V and W, and observer B uses U, V, W, X, then, by changing X, observer B can cause an effect that looks like a

violation of the second law of thermodynamics to observer A. In other words: the set of macroscopic variables one chooses must

include everything that may change in the experiment, otherwise one might see decreasing entropy.[36]

Entropy can be defined for any Markov processes with reversible dynamics and the detailed balance property.

In Boltzmann's 1896 Lectures on Gas Theory, he showed that this expression gives a measure of entropy for systems of atoms and

molecules in the gas phase, thus providing a measure for the entropy of classical thermodynamics.

Entropy of a system [edit]

Entropy arises directly from the Carnot cycle. It can also be described as the reversible heat

divided by temperature. Entropy is a fundamental function of state.

In a thermodynamic system, pressure and temperature tend to become uniform over time

because the equilibrium state has higher probability (more possible combinations of

microstates) than any other state.

As an example, for a glass of ice water in air at room temperature, the difference in

temperature between the warm room (the surroundings) and the cold glass of ice and water

(the system and not part of the room) decreases as portions of the thermal energy from the

warm surroundings spread to the cooler system of ice and water. Over time the temperature of

the glass and its contents and the temperature of the room become equal. In other words, the

entropy of the room has decreased as some of its energy has been dispersed to the ice and

water, of which the entropy has increased.

However, as calculated in the example, the entropy of the system of ice and water has

increased more than the entropy of the surrounding room has decreased. In an isolated

system such as the room and ice water taken together, the dispersal of energy from warmer to

cooler always results in a net increase in entropy. Thus, when the "universe" of the room and

ice water system has reached a temperature equilibrium, the entropy change from the initial

state is at a maximum. The entropy of the thermodynamic system is a measure of how far the

equalization has progressed.

Thermodynamic entropy is a non-conserved state function that is of great importance in the

sciences of physics and chemistry.[25][37] Historically, the concept of entropy evolved to explain

why some processes (permitted by conservation laws) occur spontaneously while their time

reversals (also permitted by conservation laws) do not; systems tend to progress in the

direction of increasing entropy.[38][39] For isolated systems, entropy never decreases.[37] This

fact has several important consequences in science: first, it prohibits "perpetual motion"

machines; and second, it implies the arrow of entropy has the same direction as the arrow of

time. Increases in the total entropy of system and surroundings correspond to irreversible

changes, because some energy is expended as waste heat, limiting the amount of work a

system can do.[25][26][40][41]

Unlike many other functions of state, entropy cannot be directly observed but must be

calculated. Absolute standard molar entropy of a substance can be calculated from the

measured temperature dependence of its heat capacity. The molar entropy of ions is obtained as a difference in entropy from a

reference state defined as zero entropy. The second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system must

increase or remain constant. Therefore, entropy is not a conserved quantity: for example, in an isolated system with non-uniform

temperature, heat might irreversibly flow and the temperature become more uniform such that entropy increases.[42] Chemical

reactions cause changes in entropy and system entropy, in conjunction with enthalpy, plays an important role in determining in which

direction a chemical reaction spontaneously proceeds.

One dictionary definition of entropy is that it is "a measure of thermal energy per unit temperature that is not available for useful work"

in a cyclic process. For instance, a substance at uniform temperature is at maximum entropy and cannot drive a heat engine. A

substance at non-uniform temperature is at a lower entropy (than if the heat distribution is allowed to even out) and some of the

thermal energy can drive a heat engine.

A special case of entropy increase, the entropy of mixing, occurs when two or more different substances are mixed. If the substances

are at the same temperature and pressure, there is no net exchange of heat or work – the entropy change is entirely due to the mixing

of the different substances. At a statistical mechanical level, this results due to the change in available volume per particle with

mixing.[43]

Equivalence of definitions [edit]

Proofs of equivalence between the definition of entropy in statistical mechanics (the Gibbs entropy formula 

) and in


classical thermodynamics (

 together with the fundamental thermodynamic relation) are known for the microcanonical ensemble,

the canonical ensemble, the grand canonical ensemble, and the isothermal–isobaric ensemble. These proofs are based on the

probability density of microstates of the generalized Boltzmann distribution and the identification of the thermodynamic internal energy

as the ensemble average 

.[44] Thermodynamic relations are then employed to derive the well-known Gibbs entropy formula.

However, the equivalence between the Gibbs entropy formula and the thermodynamic definition of entropy is not a fundamental

thermodynamic relation but rather a consequence of the form of the generalized Boltzmann distribution.[45]

Furthermore, it has been shown that the definitions of entropy in statistical mechanics is the only entropy that is equivalent to the

classical thermodynamics entropy under the following postulates:[46]

1. The probability density function is proportional to some function of the ensemble parameters and random variables.

2. Thermodynamic state functions are described by ensemble averages of random variables.

3. At infinite temperature, all the microstates have the same probability.

Second law of thermodynamics [edit]

The second law of thermodynamics requires that, in general, the total entropy of any system does not decrease other than by

increasing the entropy of some other system. Hence, in a system isolated from its environment, the entropy of that system tends not to

decrease. It follows that heat cannot flow from a colder body to a hotter body without the application of work to the colder body.

Secondly, it is impossible for any device operating on a cycle to produce net work from a single temperature reservoir; the production

of net work requires flow of heat from a hotter reservoir to a colder reservoir, or a single expanding reservoir undergoing adiabatic

cooling, which performs adiabatic work. As a result, there is no possibility of a perpetual motion machine. It follows that a reduction in

the increase of entropy in a specified process, such as a chemical reaction, means that it is energetically more efficient.

It follows from the second law of thermodynamics that the entropy of a system that is not isolated may decrease. An air conditioner, for

example, may cool the air in a room, thus reducing the entropy of the air of that system. The heat expelled from the room (the system),

which the air conditioner transports and discharges to the outside air, always makes a bigger contribution to the entropy of the

environment than the decrease of the entropy of the air of that system. Thus, the total of entropy of the room plus the entropy of the

environment increases, in agreement with the second law of thermodynamics.

In mechanics, the second law in conjunction with the fundamental thermodynamic relation places limits on a system's ability to do useful

work.[47] The entropy change of a system at temperature  absorbing an infinitesimal amount of heat  in a reversible way, is given by 

. More explicitly, an energy 

 is not available to do useful work, where  is the temperature of the coldest accessible reservoir or

heat sink external to the system. For further discussion, see Exergy.

Statistical mechanics demonstrates that entropy is governed by probability, thus allowing for a decrease in disorder even in an isolated

system. Although this is possible, such an event has a small probability of occurring, making it unlikely.[48]

The applicability of a second law of thermodynamics is limited to systems in or sufficiently near equilibrium state, so that they have

defined entropy.[49] Some inhomogeneous systems out of thermodynamic equilibrium still satisfy the hypothesis of local thermodynamic

equilibrium, so that entropy density is locally defined as an intensive quantity. For such systems, there may apply a principle of

maximum time rate of entropy production.[50][51] It states that such a system may evolve to a steady state that maximizes its time rate of

entropy production. This does not mean that such a system is necessarily always in a condition of maximum time rate of entropy

production; it means that it may evolve to such a steady state.[52][53]

Applications [edit]

The fundamental thermodynamic relation [edit]

Main article: Fundamental thermodynamic relation

The entropy of a system depends on its internal energy and its external parameters, such as its volume. In the thermodynamic limit,

this fact leads to an equation relating the change in the internal energy  to changes in the entropy and the external parameters. This

relation is known as the fundamental thermodynamic relation. If external pressure  bears on the volume  as the only external

parameter, this relation is:

Since both internal energy and entropy are monotonic functions of temperature , implying that the internal energy is fixed when one

specifies the entropy and the volume, this relation is valid even if the change from one state of thermal equilibrium to another with

infinitesimally larger entropy and volume happens in a non-quasistatic way (so during this change the system may be very far out of

thermal equilibrium and then the whole-system entropy, pressure, and temperature may not exist).

The fundamental thermodynamic relation implies many thermodynamic identities that are valid in general, independent of the

microscopic details of the system. Important examples are the Maxwell relations and the relations between heat capacities.

Entropy in chemical thermodynamics [edit]




During steady-state continuous operation, an

entropy balance applied to an open system accounts for

system entropy changes related to heat flow and mass

flow across the system boundary.

Thermodynamic entropy is central in chemical thermodynamics, enabling changes to be quantified and the outcome of reactions

predicted. The second law of thermodynamics states that entropy in an isolated system – the combination of a subsystem under study

and its surroundings – increases during all spontaneous chemical and physical processes. The Clausius equation of 

introduces the measurement of entropy change, 

. Entropy change describes the direction and quantifies the magnitude of simple

changes such as heat transfer between systems – always from hotter to cooler spontaneously.

The thermodynamic entropy therefore has the dimension of energy divided by temperature, and the unit joule per kelvin (J/K) in the

International System of Units (SI).

Thermodynamic entropy is an extensive property, meaning that it scales with the size or extent of a system. In many processes it is

useful to specify the entropy as an intensive property independent of the size, as a specific entropy characteristic of the type of system

studied. Specific entropy may be expressed relative to a unit of mass, typically the kilogram (unit: J⋅kg−1⋅K−1). Alternatively, in

chemistry, it is also referred to one mole of substance, in which case it is called the molar entropy with a unit of J⋅mol−1⋅K−1.

Thus, when one mole of substance at about 0 K is warmed by its surroundings to 298 K, the sum of the incremental values of 

constitute each element's or compound's standard molar entropy, an indicator of the amount of energy stored by a substance at

298 K.[54][55] Entropy change also measures the mixing of substances as a summation of their relative quantities in the final mixture.[56]

Entropy is equally essential in predicting the extent and direction of complex chemical reactions. For such applications, 

 must be

incorporated in an expression that includes both the system and its surroundings, 

. This expression becomes,

via some steps, the Gibbs free energy equation for reactants and products in the system: 

 [the Gibbs free energy change of the

system] 

 [the enthalpy change] 

 [the entropy change].[54]

World's technological capacity to store and communicate entropic information [edit]

A 2011 study in Science (journal) estimated the world's technological capacity to store and communicate optimally compressed

information normalized on the most effective compression algorithms available in the year 2007, therefore estimating the entropy of the

technologically available sources.[57] The author's estimate that human kind's technological capacity to store information grew from 2.6

(entropically compressed) exabytes in 1986 to 295 (entropically compressed) exabytes in 2007. The world's technological capacity to

receive information through one-way broadcast networks was 432 exabytes of (entropically compressed) information in 1986, to 1.9

zettabytes in 2007. The world's effective capacity to exchange information through two-way telecommunication networks was 281

petabytes of (entropically compressed) information in 1986, to 65 (entropically compressed) exabytes in 2007.[57]

Entropy balance equation for open systems [edit]

In chemical engineering, the principles of thermodynamics are commonly applied

to "open systems", i.e. those in which heat, work, and mass flow across the

system boundary. Flows of both heat ( ) and work, i.e. 

 (shaft work) and 

(pressure-volume work), across the system boundaries, in general cause

changes in the entropy of the system. Transfer as heat entails entropy transfer 

, where  is the absolute thermodynamic temperature of the system at the

point of the heat flow. If there are mass flows across the system boundaries, they

also influence the total entropy of the system. This account, in terms of heat and

work, is valid only for cases in which the work and heat transfers are by paths

physically distinct from the paths of entry and exit of matter from the

system.[58][59]

To derive a generalized entropy balanced equation, we start with the general

balance equation for the change in any extensive quantity  in a thermodynamic

system, a quantity that may be either conserved, such as energy, or non-

conserved, such as entropy. The basic generic balance expression states that 

, i.e. the rate of change of  in the system, equals

the rate at which  enters the system at the boundaries, minus the rate at which  leaves the system across the system boundaries, plus

the rate at which  is generated within the system. For an open thermodynamic system in which heat and work are transferred by paths

separate from the paths for transfer of matter, using this generic balance equation, with respect to the rate of change with time  of the

extensive quantity entropy , the entropy balance equation is:[60][61][note 1]

where

 is the net rate of entropy flow due to the flows of mass into and out of the system (where  is entropy per unit mass).

 is the rate of entropy flow due to the flow of heat across the system boundary.

 is the rate of entropy production within the system. This entropy production arises from processes within the system, including

chemical reactions, internal matter diffusion, internal heat transfer, and frictional effects such as viscosity occurring within the

system from mechanical work transfer to or from the system.


If there are multiple heat flows, the term 

 is replaced by 

 where  is the heat flow and  is the temperature at the th heat flow

port into the system.

Note that the nomenclature "entropy balance" is misleading and often deemed inappropriate because entropy is not a conserved

quantity. In other words, the term 

 is never a known quantity but always a derived one based on the expression above. Therefore,

the open system version of the second law is more appropriately described as the "entropy generation equation" since it specifies that 

, with zero for reversible processes or greater than zero for irreversible ones.

Entropy change formulas for simple processes [edit]

For certain simple transformations in systems of constant composition, the entropy changes are given by simple formulas.[62]

Isothermal expansion or compression of an ideal gas [edit]

For the expansion (or compression) of an ideal gas from an initial volume  and pressure  to a final volume  and pressure  at any

constant temperature, the change in entropy is given by:

Here  is the amount of gas (in moles) and  is the ideal gas constant. These equations also apply for expansion into a finite vacuum or

a throttling process, where the temperature, internal energy and enthalpy for an ideal gas remain constant.

Cooling and heating [edit]

For pure heating or cooling of any system (gas, liquid or solid) at constant pressure from an initial temperature  to a final temperature

, the entropy change is

provided that the constant-pressure molar heat capacity (or specific heat) CP is constant and that no phase transition occurs in this

temperature interval.

Similarly at constant volume, the entropy change is

where the constant-volume molar heat capacity Cv is constant and there is no phase change.

At low temperatures near absolute zero, heat capacities of solids quickly drop off to near zero, so the assumption of constant heat

capacity does not apply.[63]

Since entropy is a state function, the entropy change of any process in which temperature and volume both vary is the same as for a

path divided into two steps – heating at constant volume and expansion at constant temperature. For an ideal gas, the total entropy

change is[64]

Similarly if the temperature and pressure of an ideal gas both vary,

Phase transitions [edit]

Reversible phase transitions occur at constant temperature and pressure. The reversible heat is the enthalpy change for the

transition, and the entropy change is the enthalpy change divided by the thermodynamic temperature.[65] For fusion (melting) of a solid

to a liquid at the melting point Tm, the entropy of fusion is

Similarly, for vaporization of a liquid to a gas at the boiling point Tb, the entropy of vaporization is

Approaches to understanding entropy [edit]

As a fundamental aspect of thermodynamics and physics, several different approaches to entropy beyond that of Clausius and

Boltzmann are valid.

Standard textbook definitions [edit]

The following is a list of additional definitions of entropy from a collection of textbooks:

a measure of energy dispersal at a specific temperature.

a measure of disorder in the universe or of the availability of the energy in a system to do work.[66]


Slow motion video of a glass cup

smashing on a concrete floor. In the

very short time period of the breaking

process, the entropy of the mass

making up the glass cup rises sharply,

as the matter and energy of the glass

disperse.

a measure of a system's thermal energy per unit temperature that is unavailable for doing useful work.[67]

In Boltzmann's analysis in terms of constituent particles, entropy is a measure of the number of possible microscopic states (or

microstates) of a system in thermodynamic equilibrium.

Order and disorder

[edit]

Main article: Entropy (order and disorder)

Entropy is often loosely associated with the amount of order or disorder, or of chaos, in a thermodynamic system. The traditional

qualitative description of entropy is that it refers to changes in the status quo of the system and is a measure of "molecular disorder"

and the amount of wasted energy in a dynamical energy transformation from one state or form to another. In this direction, several

recent authors have derived exact entropy formulas to account for and measure disorder and order in atomic and molecular

assemblies.[68][69][70] One of the simpler entropy order/disorder formulas is that derived in 1984 by thermodynamic physicist Peter

Landsberg, based on a combination of thermodynamics and information theory arguments. He argues that when constraints operate

on a system, such that it is prevented from entering one or more of its possible or permitted states, as contrasted with its forbidden

states, the measure of the total amount of "disorder" in the system is given by:[69][70]

Similarly, the total amount of "order" in the system is given by:

In which CD is the "disorder" capacity of the system, which is the entropy of the parts contained in the permitted ensemble, CI is the

"information" capacity of the system, an expression similar to Shannon's channel capacity, and CO is the "order" capacity of the

system.[68]

Energy dispersal [edit]

Main article: Entropy (energy dispersal)

The concept of entropy can be described qualitatively as a measure of energy dispersal at a

specific temperature.[71] Similar terms have been in use from early in the history of classical

thermodynamics, and with the development of statistical thermodynamics and quantum theory,

entropy changes have been described in terms of the mixing or "spreading" of the total energy

of each constituent of a system over its particular quantized energy levels.

Ambiguities in the terms disorder and chaos, which usually have meanings directly opposed to

equilibrium, contribute to widespread confusion and hamper comprehension of entropy for

most students.[72] As the second law of thermodynamics shows, in an isolated system internal portions at different temperatures tend to

adjust to a single uniform temperature and thus produce equilibrium. A recently developed educational approach avoids ambiguous

terms and describes such spreading out of energy as dispersal, which leads to loss of the differentials required for work even though

the total energy remains constant in accordance with the first law of thermodynamics[73] (compare discussion in next section). Physical

chemist Peter Atkins, in his textbook Physical Chemistry, introduces entropy with the statement that "spontaneous changes are always

accompanied by a dispersal of energy or matter and often both".[74]

Relating entropy to energy usefulness [edit]

It is possible (in a thermal context) to regard lower entropy as a measure of the effectiveness or usefulness of a particular quantity of

energy.[75] Energy supplied at a higher temperature (i.e. with low entropy) tends to be more useful than the same amount of energy

available at a lower temperature. Mixing a hot parcel of a fluid with a cold one produces a parcel of intermediate temperature, in which

the overall increase in entropy represents a "loss" that can never be replaced.

As the entropy of the universe is steadily increasing, its total energy is becoming less useful. Eventually, this leads to the heat death of

the universe.[76]

Entropy and adiabatic accessibility [edit]

A definition of entropy based entirely on the relation of adiabatic accessibility between equilibrium states was given by E. H. Lieb and

J. Yngvason in 1999.[77] This approach has several predecessors, including the pioneering work of Constantin Carathéodory from

1909[78] and the monograph by R. Giles.[79] In the setting of Lieb and Yngvason, one starts by picking, for a unit amount of the

substance under consideration, two reference states  and  such that the latter is adiabatically accessible from the former but not

conversely. Defining the entropies of the reference states to be 0 and 1 respectively, the entropy of a state  is defined as the largest

number  such that  is adiabatically accessible from a composite state consisting of an amount  in the state  and a complementary

amount, 

, in the state . A simple but important result within this setting is that entropy is uniquely determined, apart from a choice

of unit and an additive constant for each chemical element, by the following properties: It is monotonic with respect to the relation of

adiabatic accessibility, additive on composite systems, and extensive under scaling.


Entropy in quantum mechanics [edit]

Main article: von Neumann entropy

In quantum statistical mechanics, the concept of entropy was developed by John von Neumann and is generally referred to as "von

Neumann entropy",

where ρ is the density matrix, and Tr is the trace operator.

This upholds the correspondence principle, because in the classical limit, when the phases between the basis states used for the

classical probabilities are purely random, this expression is equivalent to the familiar classical definition of entropy,

i.e. in such a basis the density matrix is diagonal.

Von Neumann established a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics with his work Mathematische Grundlagen der

Quantenmechanik. He provided in this work a theory of measurement, where the usual notion of wave function collapse is described as

an irreversible process (the so-called von Neumann or projective measurement). Using this concept, in conjunction with the density

matrix he extended the classical concept of entropy into the quantum domain.

Information theory [edit]

Main articles: Entropy (information theory), Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory, and Entropic uncertainty

I thought of calling it "information", but the word was overly used, so I decided to call it "uncertainty". [...] Von Neumann told me, "You should call it

entropy, for two reasons. In the first place your uncertainty function has been used in statistical mechanics under that name, so it already has a name. In

the second place, and more important, nobody knows what entropy really is, so in a debate you will always have the advantage.

Conversation between Claude Shannon and John von Neumann regarding what name to give to the attenuation in phone-line signals[80]

When viewed in terms of information theory, the entropy state function is the amount of information in the system that is needed to fully

specify the microstate of the system. Entropy is the measure of the amount of missing information before reception.[81] Often called

Shannon entropy, it was originally devised by Claude Shannon in 1948 to study the size of information of a transmitted message. The

definition of information entropy is expressed in terms of a discrete set of probabilities  so that

where the base of the logarithm determines the units (for example, the binary logarithm corresponds to bits).

In the case of transmitted messages, these probabilities were the probabilities that a particular message was actually transmitted, and

the entropy of the message system was a measure of the average size of information of a message. For the case of equal probabilities

(i.e. each message is equally probable), the Shannon entropy (in bits) is just the number of binary questions needed to determine the

content of the message.[28]

Most researchers consider information entropy and thermodynamic entropy directly linked to the same concept,[82][83][84][85][86] while

others argue that they are distinct.[87] Both expressions are mathematically similar. If  is the number of microstates that can yield a

given macrostate, and each microstate has the same a priori probability, then that probability is 

. The Shannon entropy (in nats)

is

and if entropy is measured in units of  per nat, then the entropy is given by

which is the Boltzmann entropy formula, where  is the Boltzmann constant, which may be interpreted as the thermodynamic entropy

per nat. Some authors argue for dropping the word entropy for the  function of information theory and using Shannon's other term,

"uncertainty", instead.[88]

Measurement

[edit]

The entropy of a substance can be measured, although in an indirect way. The measurement, known as entropymetry,[89] is done on a

closed system (with particle number N and volume V being constants) and uses the definition of temperature[90] in terms of entropy,

while limiting energy exchange to heat (

).

The resulting relation describes how entropy changes  when a small amount of energy  is introduced into the system at a certain

temperature .

The process of measurement goes as follows. First, a sample of the substance is cooled as close to absolute zero as possible. At such


temperatures, the entropy approaches zero – due to the definition of temperature. Then, small amounts of heat are introduced into the

sample and the change in temperature is recorded, until the temperature reaches a desired value (usually 25 °C). The obtained data

allows the user to integrate the equation above, yielding the absolute value of entropy of the substance at the final temperature. This

value of entropy is called calorimetric entropy.[91]

Interdisciplinary applications [edit]

Although the concept of entropy was originally a thermodynamic concept, it has been adapted in other fields of study,[60] including

information theory, psychodynamics, thermoeconomics/ecological economics, and evolution.[68][92][93][94][95]

Philosophy and theoretical physics [edit]

Entropy is the only quantity in the physical sciences that seems to imply a particular direction of progress, sometimes called an arrow

of time. As time progresses, the second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system never decreases in large

systems over significant periods of time. Hence, from this perspective, entropy measurement is thought of as a clock in these

conditions.[citation needed]

Biology [edit]

Chiavazzo et al. proposed that where cave spiders choose to lay their eggs can be explained through entropy minimization.[96]

Entropy has been proven useful in the analysis of base pair sequences in DNA. Many entropy-based measures have been shown to

distinguish between different structural regions of the genome, differentiate between coding and non-coding regions of DNA, and can

also be applied for the recreation of evolutionary trees by determining the evolutionary distance between different species.[97]

Cosmology [edit]

Assuming that a finite universe is an isolated system, the second law of thermodynamics states that its total entropy is continually

increasing. It has been speculated, since the 19th century, that the universe is fated to a heat death in which all the energy ends up as

a homogeneous distribution of thermal energy so that no more work can be extracted from any source.

If the universe can be considered to have generally increasing entropy, then – as Roger Penrose has pointed out – gravity plays an

important role in the increase because gravity causes dispersed matter to accumulate into stars, which collapse eventually into black

holes. The entropy of a black hole is proportional to the surface area of the black hole's event horizon.[98][99][100] Jacob Bekenstein and

Stephen Hawking have shown that black holes have the maximum possible entropy of any object of equal size. This makes them likely

end points of all entropy-increasing processes, if they are totally effective matter and energy traps.[101] However, the escape of energy

from black holes might be possible due to quantum activity (see Hawking radiation).

The role of entropy in cosmology remains a controversial subject since the time of Ludwig Boltzmann. Recent work has cast some

doubt on the heat death hypothesis and the applicability of any simple thermodynamic model to the universe in general. Although

entropy does increase in the model of an expanding universe, the maximum possible entropy rises much more rapidly, moving the

universe further from the heat death with time, not closer.[102][103][104] This results in an "entropy gap" pushing the system further away

from the posited heat death equilibrium.[105] Other complicating factors, such as the energy density of the vacuum and macroscopic

quantum effects, are difficult to reconcile with thermodynamical models, making any predictions of large-scale thermodynamics

extremely difficult.[106]

Current theories suggest the entropy gap to have been originally opened up by the early rapid exponential expansion of the

universe.[107]

Economics [edit]

See also: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen § The relevance of thermodynamics to economics, and Ecological economics

§ Methodology

Romanian American economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, a progenitor in economics and a paradigm founder of ecological

economics, made extensive use of the entropy concept in his magnum opus on The Entropy Law and the Economic Process.[83] Due to

Georgescu-Roegen's work, the laws of thermodynamics form an integral part of the ecological economics school.[108]: 204f [109]: 29–35 

Although his work was blemished somewhat by mistakes, a full chapter on the economics of Georgescu-Roegen has approvingly been

included in one elementary physics textbook on the historical development of thermodynamics.[110]: 95–112 

In economics, Georgescu-Roegen's work has generated the term 'entropy pessimism'.[111]: 116  Since the 1990s, leading ecological

economist and steady-state theorist Herman Daly – a student of Georgescu-Roegen – has been the economics profession's most

influential proponent of the entropy pessimism position.[112]: 545f [113]

See also [edit]

Boltzmann entropy


Brownian ratchet

Configuration entropy

Conformational entropy

Entropic explosion

Entropic force

Entropic value at risk

Entropy and life

Entropy unit

Free entropy

Harmonic entropy

Info-metrics

Negentropy (negative entropy)

Phase space

Principle of maximum entropy

Residual entropy

Thermodynamic potential

Notes [edit]

1. ^ The overdots represent derivatives of the quantities with respect to time.

References [edit]

1. ^ Wehrl, Alfred (1 April 1978). "General properties of entropy" . Reviews of Modern Physics. 50 (2): 221–260.

Bibcode:1978RvMP...50..221W . doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.50.221 .

2. ^ Truesdell, C. (1980). The Tragicomical History of Thermodynamics, 1822–1854 . New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 215. ISBN 0387904034 –

via Internet Archive.

3. ^ Brush, S.G. (1976). The Kind of Motion We Call Heat: a History of the Kinetic Theory of Gases in the 19th Century, Book 2, Statistical

Physics and Irreversible Processes, Elsevier, Amsterdam, ISBN 0-444-87009-1, pp. 576–577.

4. ^ Ben-Naim, Arieh (2008). A Farewell to Entropy: Statistical Thermodynamics Based on Information. Singapore: World-Scientific Publishing.

ISBN 9789812707062.

5. ^ "Carnot, Sadi (1796–1832)" . Wolfram Research. 2007. Retrieved 24 February 2010.

6. ^ McCulloch, Richard, S. (1876). Treatise on the Mechanical Theory of Heat and its Applications to the Steam-Engine, etc. D. Van

Nostrand.

7. ^ a b Clausius, Rudolf (1850). "Über die bewegende Kraft der Wärme und die Gesetze, welche sich daraus für die Wärmelehre selbst

ableiten lassen". Annalen der Physik (in German). 155 (3): 368–397. Bibcode:1850AnP...155..368C . doi:10.1002/andp.18501550306 .

hdl:2027/uc1.$b242250 . [On the Motive Power of Heat, and on the Laws which can be deduced from it for the Theory of Heat] :

Poggendorff's Annalen der Physik und Chemie.

8. ^ Liddell, H. G., Scott, R. (1843/1978). A Greek–English Lexicon, revised and augmented edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK,

ISBN 0198642148, pp. 1826–1827.

9. ^ a b Clausius, Rudolf (1865). "Ueber verschiedene für die Anwendung bequeme Formen der Hauptgleichungen der mechanischen

Wärmetheorie (Vorgetragen in der naturforsch. Gesellschaft zu Zürich den 24. April 1865)" . Annalen der Physik und Chemie (in German).

125 (7): 353–400. Bibcode:1865AnP...201..353C . doi:10.1002/andp.18652010702 . p. 390: "Sucht man für S einen bezeichnenden

Namen, so könnte man, ähnlich wie von der Gröſse U gesagt ist, sie sey der Wärme- und Werkinhalt des Körpers, von der Gröſse S sagen,

sie sey der Verwandlungsinhalt des Körpers. Da ich es aber für besser halte, die Namen derartiger für die Wissenschaft wichtiger Gröſsen

aus den alten Sprachen zu entnehmen, damit sie unverändert in allen neuen Sprachen angewandt werden können, so schlage ich vor, die

Gröſse S nach dem griechischen Worte ἡ τροπή, die Verwandlung, die Entropie des Körpers zu nennen. Das Wort Entropie habei ich

absichtlich dem Worte Energie möglichst ähnlich gebildet, denn die beiden Gröſsen, welche durch diese Worte benannt werden sollen, sind

ihren physikalischen Bedeutungen nach einander so nahe verwandt, daſs eine gewisse Gleichartigkeit in der Benennung mir zweckmäſsig

zu seyn scheint."

10. ^ a b Gillispie, Charles Coulston (1960). The Edge of Objectivity: An Essay in the History of Scientific Ideas . Princeton University Press.

p. 399 . ISBN 0-691-02350-6. "Clausius coined the word entropy for : "I prefer going to the ancient languages for the names of important

scientific quantities, so that they may mean the same thing in all living tongues. I propose, accordingly, to call  the entropy of a body, after

the Greek word 'transformation'. I have designedly coined the word entropy to be similar to 'energy', for these two quantities are so

analogous in their physical significance, that an analogy of denomination seemed to me helpful.""

11. ^ a b Cooper, Leon N. (1968). An Introduction to the Meaning and Structure of Physics. Harper. p. 331.

12. ^ The scientific papers of J. Willard Gibbs in Two Volumes . Vol. 1. Longmans, Green, and Co. 1906. p. 11. Retrieved 26 February 2011.

13. ^ J. A. McGovern,"2.5 Entropy" . Archived from the original  on 23 September 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2013.

14. ^ "6.5 Irreversibility, Entropy Changes, and Lost Work" . web.mit.edu. Retrieved 21 May 2016.

15. ^ Lower, Stephen. "What is entropy?" . chem1.com. Retrieved 21 May 2016.

16. ^ Lavenda, Bernard H. (2010). "2.3.4". A new perspective on thermodynamics (Online-Ausg. ed.). New York: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4419-

1430-9.


17. ^ Carnot, Sadi Carnot (1986). Fox, Robert (ed.). Reflexions on the motive power of fire . New York: Lilian Barber Press. pp. 26 .

ISBN 978-0-936508-16-0.

18. ^ Truesdell, C. (1980). The tragicomical history of thermodynamics 1822–1854 . New York: Springer. pp. 78 –85. ISBN 978-0-387-90403-

0.

19. ^ Clerk Maxwell, James (2001). Pesic, Peter (ed.). Theory of heat. Mineola: Dover Publications. pp. 115–158. ISBN 978-0-486-41735-6.

20. ^ a b Planck, M. (1945). Treatise on Thermodynamics. Dover Publications. p. §90 &amp; §137. "eqs.(39), (40), &amp; (65)".

21. ^ Rudolf Clausius (1867). The Mechanical Theory of Heat: With Its Applications to the Steam-engine and to the Physical Properties of

Bodies . J. Van Voorst. p. 28. ISBN 978-1-4981-6733-8.

22. ^ Fermi, E. (1956). Thermodynamics. Dover Publications (still in print). p. 48. "eq.(64)".

23. ^ Atkins, Peter; Julio De Paula (2006). Physical Chemistry, 8th ed. Oxford University Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-19-870072-2.

24. ^ Engel, Thomas; Philip Reid (2006). Physical Chemistry. Pearson Benjamin Cummings. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-8053-3842-3.

25. ^ a b c Licker, Mark D. (2004). McGraw-Hill concise encyclopedia of chemistry. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-143953-

4.

26. ^ a b Sethna, James P. (2006). Statistical mechanics : entropy, order parameters, and complexity  ([Online-Ausg.] ed.). Oxford: Oxford

University Press. p. 78 . ISBN 978-0-19-856677-9.

27. ^ Clark, John O. E. (2004). The essential dictionary of science. New York: Barnes &amp; Noble. ISBN 978-0-7607-4616-5.

28. ^ a b 



Frigg, R. and Werndl, C. "Entropy – A Guide for the Perplexed"

. In Probabilities in Physics; Beisbart C. and Hartmann, S. (eds.);

Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010.

29. ^ Schroeder, Daniel V. (2000). An introduction to thermal physics . San Francisco, CA: Addison Wesley. p. 57 . ISBN 978-0-201-38027-

9.

30. ^ Allen, Michael P.; Tildesley, Dominic J. (23 November 2017). "Computer Simulation of Liquids". Oxford Scholarship Online.

doi:10.1093/oso/9780198803195.001.0001 . ISBN 9780198803195.

31. ^ Rosenfeld, Yaakov (1 June 1977). "Relation between the transport coefficients and the internal entropy of simple systems". Physical

Review A. 15 (6): 2545–2549. Bibcode:1977PhRvA..15.2545R . doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.15.2545 . ISSN 0556-2791 .

32. ^ Dyre, Jeppe C. (2018). "Perspective: Excess-entropy scaling" . The Journal of Chemical Physics. 149 (21): 210901.

Bibcode:2018JChPh.149u0901D . doi:10.1063/1.5055064 . ISSN 0021-9606 . PMID 30525736 .

33. ^ Bell, Ian H. (2019). "Probing the link between residual entropy and viscosity of molecular fluids and model potentials" . Proceedings of

the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (10): 4070–4079. arXiv:1809.05682 . Bibcode:2019PNAS..116.4070B .

doi:10.1073/pnas.1815943116 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 6410835 . PMID 30770449 .

34. ^ Bell, Ian H.; Dyre, Jeppe C.; Ingebrigtsen, Trond S. (2020). "Excess-entropy scaling in supercooled binary mixtures" . Nature

Communications. 11 (1): 4300. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.4300B . doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17948-1 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 7453028 .

PMID 32855393 .

35. ^ Jaynes, E. T. (1 May 1965). "Gibbs vs Boltzmann Entropies" . American Journal of Physics. 33 (5): 391–398.

Bibcode:1965AmJPh..33..391J . doi:10.1119/1.1971557 . ISSN 0002-9505 .

36. ^ Jaynes, E. T. (1992). "The Gibbs Paradox". In Smith, C. R.; Erickson, G. J.; Neudorfer, P. O. (eds.). Maximum Entropy and Bayesian



Methods

 (PDF). Kluwer Academic: Dordrecht. pp. 1–22. Retrieved 17 August 2012.

37. ^ a b Sandler, Stanley I. (2006). Chemical, biochemical, and engineering thermodynamics  (4th ed.). New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons.

p. 91 . ISBN 978-0-471-66174-0.

38. ^ Simon, Donald A. McQuarrie; John D. (1997). Physical chemistry : a molecular approach (Rev. ed.). Sausalito, Calif.: Univ. Science

Books. p. 817. ISBN 978-0-935702-99-6.

39. ^ Haynie, Donald, T. (2001). Biological Thermodynamics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-79165-6.

40. ^ Daintith, John (2005). A dictionary of science (5th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280641-3.

41. ^ de Rosnay, Joel (1979). The Macroscope – a New World View (written by an M.I.T.-trained biochemist). Harper &amp; Row, Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-06-011029-1.

42. ^ McGovern, J. A. "Heat Capacities" . Archived from the original  on 19 August 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2013.

43. ^ Ben-Naim, Arieh (21 September 2007). 



"On the So-Called Gibbs Paradox, and on the Real Paradox"

 (PDF). Entropy. 9 (3): 132–136.

Bibcode:2007Entrp...9..132B . doi:10.3390/e9030133 .

44. ^ Callen, Herbert (2001). Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics (2nd ed.). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-86256-

7.

45. ^ Gao, Xiang; Gallicchio, Emilio; Roitberg, Adrian (2019). "The generalized Boltzmann distribution is the only distribution in which the Gibbs-

Shannon entropy equals the thermodynamic entropy". The Journal of Chemical Physics. 151 (3): 034113. arXiv:1903.02121 .

Bibcode:2019JChPh.151c4113G . doi:10.1063/1.5111333 . PMID 31325924 . S2CID 118981017 .

46. ^ Gao, Xiang (March 2022). "The Mathematics of the Ensemble Theory" . Results in Physics. 34: 105230.

Bibcode:2022ResPh..3405230G . doi:10.1016/j.rinp.2022.105230 . S2CID 221978379 .

47. ^ Daintith, John (2005). Oxford Dictionary of Physics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280628-4.

48. ^ Saha, Arnab; Lahiri, Sourabh; Jayannavar, A. M. (2009). "Entropy production theorems and some consequences". Physical Review E. 80

(1): 1–10. arXiv:0903.4147 . Bibcode:2009PhRvE..80a1117S . doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.80.011117 . PMID 19658663 .

S2CID 22204063 .

49. ^ Martyushev, L. M.; Seleznev, V. D. (2014). "The restrictions of the maximum entropy production principle". Physica A: Statistical

Mechanics and Its Applications. 410: 17–21. arXiv:1311.2068 . Bibcode:2014PhyA..410...17M . doi:10.1016/j.physa.2014.05.014 .

S2CID 119224112 .

50. ^ Ziegler, H. (1983). An Introduction to Thermomechanics. North Holland, Amsterdam.


51. ^ Onsager, Lars (1931). "Reciprocal Relations in Irreversible Processes" . Phys. Rev. 37 (4): 405. Bibcode:1931PhRv...37..405O .

doi:10.1103/PhysRev.37.405 .

52. ^ Kleidon, A.; et., al. (2005). Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics and the Production of Entropy. Heidelberg: Springer.

53. ^ Belkin, Andrey; et., al. (2015). "Self-assembled wiggling nano-structures and the principle of maximum entropy production" . Scientific

Reports. 5: 8323. Bibcode:2015NatSR...5E8323B . doi:10.1038/srep08323 . PMC 4321171 . PMID 25662746 .

54. ^ a b Moore, J. W.; C. L. Stanistski; P. C. Jurs (2005). Chemistry, The Molecular Science . Brooks Cole. ISBN 978-0-534-42201-1.

55. ^ Jungermann, A.H. (2006). "Entropy and the Shelf Model: A Quantum Physical Approach to a Physical Property". Journal of Chemical

Education. 83 (11): 1686–1694. Bibcode:2006JChEd..83.1686J . doi:10.1021/ed083p1686 . S2CID 18081336 .

56. ^ Levine, I. N. (2002). Physical Chemistry, 5th ed . McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-231808-1.

57. ^ a b Hilbert, Martin; López, Priscila (11 February 2011). "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute

Information" . Science. 332 (6025): 60–65. doi:10.1126/science.1200970 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 21310967 . S2CID 206531385 .

58. ^ Late Nobel Laureate Max Born (8 August 2015). Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance . BiblioLife. pp. 44, 146–147. ISBN 978-1-298-

49740-6.

59. ^ Haase, R. (1971). Thermodynamics. New York: Academic Press. pp. 1–97. ISBN 978-0-12-245601-5.

60. ^ a b Pokrovskii, Vladimir (2020). Thermodynamics of Complex Systems: Principles and applications. IOP Publishing, Bristol, UK.

Bibcode:2020tcsp.book.....P .

61. ^ Sandler, Stanley, I. (1989). Chemical and Engineering Thermodynamics. John Wiley &amp; Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-83050-4.

62. ^ "GRC.nasa.gov" . GRC.nasa.gov. 27 March 2000. Archived from the original  on 21 August 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2012.

63. ^ Franzen, Stefan. 



"Third Law"

 (PDF). ncsu.edu. Archived from 



the original

 (PDF) on 9 July 2017.

64. ^ "GRC.nasa.gov" . GRC.nasa.gov. 11 July 2008. Retrieved 17 August 2012.

65. ^ Starzak, Michael E. (2010). "Phase Equilibria &amp; Colligative Properties" . Energy &amp; Entropy: Equilibrium to Stationary States. Springer

Science+Business Media. pp. 138–140. ISBN 978-1489983671. Retrieved 5 September 2019.

66. ^ Gribbin, John (1999). Gribbin, Mary (ed.). Q is for quantum : an encyclopedia of particle physics . New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-

684-85578-3.

67. ^ "Entropy: Definition and Equation" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 22 May 2016.

68. ^ a b c Brooks, Daniel R.; Wiley, E. O. (1988). Evolution as entropy : toward a unified theory of biology (2nd ed.). Chicago [etc.]: University

of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-07574-7.

69. ^ a b Landsberg, P.T. (1984). "Is Equilibrium always an Entropy Maximum?". J. Stat. Physics. 35 (1–2): 159–169.

Bibcode:1984JSP....35..159L . doi:10.1007/bf01017372 . S2CID 122424225 .

70. ^ a b Landsberg, P.T. (1984). "Can Entropy and "Order" Increase Together?". Physics Letters. 102A (4): 171–173.

Bibcode:1984PhLA..102..171L . doi:10.1016/0375-9601(84)90934-4 .

71. ^ Lambert, Frank L. "A Student's Approach to the Second Law and Entropy" . entropysite.oxy.edu. Archived from the original  on 17 July

2009. Retrieved 22 May 2016.

72. ^ Watson, J.R.; Carson, E.M. (May 2002). 



"Undergraduate students' understandings of entropy and Gibbs free energy"

 (PDF). University

Chemistry Education. 6 (1): 4. ISSN 1369-5614 .

73. ^ Lambert, Frank L. (February 2002). "Disorder – A Cracked Crutch for Supporting Entropy Discussions". Journal of Chemical Education.

79 (2): 187. Bibcode:2002JChEd..79..187L . doi:10.1021/ed079p187 . S2CID 97102995 .

74. ^ Peter Atkins; Julio de Paula; James Keeler (2019). Atkins' Physical Chemistry 11e: Volume 3: Molecular Thermodynamics and

Kinetics . Oxford University Press. p. 89. ISBN 978-0-19-882336-0.

75. ^ Sandra Saary (23 February 1993). "Book Review of 'A Science Miscellany'" . Khaleej Times. UAE: Galadari Press: xi.

76. ^ Smith, Crosbie; Wise, M. Norton (1989). Energy and Empire: A Biographical Study of Lord Kelvin. Cambridge University Press. pp. 500–

501. ISBN 978-0-521-26173-9.

77. ^ Lieb, Elliott H.; Yngvason, Jakob (March 1999). "The physics and mathematics of the second law of thermodynamics". Physics Reports.

310 (1): 1–96. arXiv:cond-mat/9708200 . Bibcode:1999PhR...310....1L . doi:10.1016/S0370-1573(98)00082-9 . S2CID 119620408 .

78. ^ Carathéodory, C. (September 1909). "Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Thermodynamik" . Mathematische Annalen (in German).

67 (3): 355–386. doi:10.1007/BF01450409 . S2CID 118230148 .

79. ^ R. Giles (2016). Mathematical Foundations of Thermodynamics: International Series of Monographs on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

Elsevier Science. ISBN 978-1-4831-8491-3.

80. ^ Tribus, M.; McIrvine, E. C. (1971). "Energy and information". Scientific American. 224: 178–184.

81. ^ Balian, Roger (2004). "Entropy, a Protean concept". In Dalibard, Jean (ed.). Poincaré Seminar 2003: Bose-Einstein condensation –

entropy. Basel: Birkhäuser. pp. 119–144. ISBN 978-3-7643-7116-6.

82. ^ Brillouin, Leon (1956). Science and Information Theory. ISBN 978-0-486-43918-1.

83. ^ a b Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1971). The Entropy Law and the Economic Process . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-25781-

8.

84. ^ Chen, Jing (2005). The Physical Foundation of Economics – an Analytical Thermodynamic Theory. World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-256-

323-1.

85. ^ Kalinin, M.I.; Kononogov, S.A. (2005). "Boltzmann's constant". Measurement Techniques. 48 (7): 632–636. doi:10.1007/s11018-005-0195-

9 . S2CID 118726162 .

86. ^ Ben-Naim, Arieh (2008). Entropy demystified the second law reduced to plain common sense  (Expanded ed.). Singapore: World

Scientific. ISBN 9789812832269.


87. ^ Vallino, Joseph J.; Algar, Christopher K.; González, Nuria Fernández; Huber, Julie A. (2013). "Use of Receding Horizon Optimal Control to

Solve MaxEP-Based (max entropy production) Biogeochemistry Problems" . In Dewar, Roderick C.; Lineweaver, Charles H.; Niven, Robert

K.; Regenauer-Lieb, Klaus (eds.). Beyond the Second Law: Entropy Production &amp; Non-equilibrium Systems. Living Systems as Catalysts.

Springer. p. 340. ISBN 978-3642401534. Retrieved 31 August 2019. "Inked page forms pattern w/ information → page entropy &lt; diff page w/

randomized letters. Reduced entropy trivial compared to inked paper entropy. If the paper is burned, it hardly matters in a thermodynamic

context if the text contains the meaning of life or only jibberish [sic]."

88. ^ Schneider, Tom, DELILA system (Deoxyribonucleic acid Library Language), (Information Theory Analysis of binding sites), Laboratory of

Mathematical Biology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD.

89. ^ Kim, Hye Jin; Park, Youngkyu; Kwon, Yoonjin; Shin, Jaeho; Kim, Young-Han; Ahn, Hyun-Seok; Yazami, Rachid; Choi, Jang Wook

(2020). "Entropymetry for non-destructive structural analysis of LiCoO 2 cathodes" . Energy &amp; Environmental Science. 13 (1): 286–296.

doi:10.1039/C9EE02964H . ISSN 1754-5692 . S2CID 212779004 .

90. ^ Schroeder, Daniel V. (2000). An introduction to thermal physics  ([Nachdr.] ed.). San Francisco, CA [u.a.]: Addison Wesley. p. 88 .

ISBN 978-0-201-38027-9.

91. ^ "Measuring Entropy" . chem.wisc.edu.

92. ^ Avery, John (2003). Information Theory and Evolution. World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-238-399-0.

93. ^ Yockey, Hubert, P. (2005). Information Theory, Evolution, and the Origin of Life. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80293-2.

94. ^ Chiavazzo, Eliodoro; Fasano, Matteo; Asinari, Pietro (2013). 



"Inference of analytical thermodynamic models for biological networks"

(PDF). Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications. 392 (5): 1122–1132. Bibcode:2013PhyA..392.1122C .

doi:10.1016/j.physa.2012.11.030 . S2CID 12418973 .

95. ^ Chen, Jing (2015). The Unity of Science and Economics: A New Foundation of Economic Theory . Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-

3466-9 . ISBN 978-1-4939-3464-5.

96. ^ Chiavazzo, Eliodoro; Isaia, Marco; Mammola, Stefano; Lepore, Emiliano; Ventola, Luigi; Asinari, Pietro; Pugno, Nicola Maria (2015).

"Cave spiders choose optimal environmental factors with respect to the generated entropy when laying their cocoon" . Scientific Reports.

5: 7611. Bibcode:2015NatSR...5E7611C . doi:10.1038/srep07611 . PMC 5154591 . PMID 25556697 .

97. ^ Thanos, Dimitrios; Li, Wentian; Provata, Astero (1 March 2018). "Entropic fluctuations in DNA sequences". Physica A: Statistical

Mechanics and Its Applications. 493: 444–457. Bibcode:2018PhyA..493..444T . doi:10.1016/j.physa.2017.11.119 . ISSN 0378-4371 .

98. ^ von Baeyer, Christian, H. (2003). Information–the New Language of Science . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01387-2.

99. ^ Srednicki M (August 1993). "Entropy and area". Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (5): 666–669. arXiv:hep-th/9303048 .

Bibcode:1993PhRvL..71..666S . doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.666 . PMID 10055336 . S2CID 9329564 .

100. ^ Callaway DJE (April 1996). "Surface tension, hydrophobicity, and black holes: The entropic connection". Phys. Rev. E. 53 (4): 3738–3744.

arXiv:cond-mat/9601111 . Bibcode:1996PhRvE..53.3738C . doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.53.3738 . PMID 9964684 . S2CID 7115890 .

101. ^ Sarkar, T.K.; Salazar-Palma, M.; Mokole, Eric L. (2008). "A Look at the Concept of Channel Capacity from a Maxwellian Viewpoint" .

Physics of Multiantenna Systems &amp; Broadband Processing. Wiley. p. 162. ISBN 978-0470190401. Retrieved 31 August 2019.

102. ^ Layzer, David (1988). Growth of Order in the Universe. MIT Press.

103. ^ Chaisson, Eric J. (2001). Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of Complexity in Nature . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00342-2.

104. ^ Lineweaver, Charles H.; Davies, Paul C. W.; Ruse, Michael, eds. (2013). Complexity and the Arrow of Time. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-02725-1.

105. ^ Stenger, Victor J. (2007). God: The Failed Hypothesis. Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-59102-481-1.

106. ^ Benjamin Gal-Or (1987). Cosmology, Physics and Philosophy. Springer Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-96526-0.

107. ^ Albrecht, Andreas (2004). 



"Cosmic Inflation and the Arrow of Time"

 (PDF). In Barrow, John D.; Davies, Paul C.W.; Harper, Charles L.

(eds.). Science and Ultimate Reality: From Quantum to Cosmos. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0210527 .

Bibcode:2002astro.ph.10527A . Retrieved 28 June 2017. In honor of John Wheeler's 90th birthday.

108. ^ Cleveland, Cutler J.; Ruth, Matthias (1997). "When, where, and by how much do biophysical limits constrain the economic process? A

survey of Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen's contribution to ecological economics" . Ecological Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 22 (3): 203–

223. doi:10.1016/s0921-8009(97)00079-7 .

109. ^ Daly, Herman E.; Farley, Joshua (2011). 



Ecological Economics. Principles and Applications

 (PDF contains full book) (2nd ed.).

Washington: Island Press. ISBN 978-1-59726-681-9.

110. ^ Schmitz, John E.J. (2007). The Second Law of Life: Energy, Technology, and the Future of Earth As We Know It (Link to the author's

science blog, based on his textbook). Norwich: William Andrew Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8155-1537-1.

111. ^ Ayres, Robert U. (2007). 



"On the practical limits to substitution"

 (PDF). Ecological Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 61: 115–128.

doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.02.011 . S2CID 154728333 .

112. ^ Kerschner, Christian (2010). 



"Economic de-growth vs. steady-state economy"

 (PDF). Journal of Cleaner Production. Amsterdam:

Elsevier. 18 (6): 544–551. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2009.10.019 .

113. ^ Daly, Herman E. (2015). "Economics for a Full World" . Scientific American. 293 (3): 100–7. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0905-100 .

PMID 16121860 . S2CID 13441670 . Retrieved 23 November 2016.

David, Kover. "Entropia – fyzikálna veličina vesmíru a nášho života"

. stejfree.sk. Retrieved 13 April 2022.

Further reading [edit]

Adam, Gerhard; Otto Hittmair (1992). Wärmetheorie. Vieweg, Braunschweig. ISBN 978-3-528-33311-9.

Atkins, Peter; Julio De Paula (2006). Physical Chemistry (8th ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-870072-2.

Baierlein, Ralph (2003). Thermal Physics

. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65838-6.

Ben-Naim, Arieh (2007). Entropy Demystified. World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-270-055-1.


v · t · e

Callen, Herbert, B (2001). Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics (2nd ed.). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-

471-86256-7.

Chang, Raymond (1998). Chemistry

 (6th ed.). New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-115221-1.

Cutnell, John, D.; Johnson, Kenneth, J. (1998). Physics

 (4th ed.). John Wiley and Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-471-19113-1.

Dugdale, J. S. (1996). Entropy and its Physical Meaning (2nd ed.). Taylor and Francis (UK); CRC (US). ISBN 978-0-7484-0569-5.

Fermi, Enrico (1937). Thermodynamics. Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-486-60361-2.

Goldstein, Martin; Inge, F (1993). The Refrigerator and the Universe

. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-75325-9.

Gyftopoulos, E.P.; G.P. Beretta (2010). Thermodynamics. Foundations and Applications. Dover. ISBN 978-0-486-43932-7.

Haddad, Wassim M.; Chellaboina, VijaySekhar; Nersesov, Sergey G. (2005). Thermodynamics – A Dynamical Systems Approach.

Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-12327-1.

Johnson, Eric (2018). Anxiety and the Equation: Understanding Boltzmann's Entropy. The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-03861-4.

Kroemer, Herbert; Charles Kittel (1980). Thermal Physics (2nd ed.). W. H. Freeman Company. ISBN 978-0-7167-1088-2.

Lambert, Frank L.; entropysite.oxy.edu

Müller-Kirsten, Harald J. W. (2013). Basics of Statistical Physics (2nd ed.). Singapore: World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-4449-53-3.

Penrose, Roger (2005). The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe

. New York: A. A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-

679-45443-4.

Reif, F. (1965). Fundamentals of statistical and thermal physics

. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-051800-1.

Schroeder, Daniel V. (2000). Introduction to Thermal Physics. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 978-0-201-38027-9.

Serway, Raymond, A. (1992). Physics for Scientists and Engineers

. Saunders Golden Subburst Series. ISBN 978-0-03-096026-0.

Sharp, Kim (2019). Entropy and the Tao of Counting: A Brief Introduction to Statistical Mechanics and the Second Law of

Thermodynamics (SpringerBriefs in Physics). Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3030354596.

Spirax-Sarco Limited, Entropy – A Basic Understanding

 A primer on entropy tables for steam engineering

vonBaeyer; Hans Christian (1998). Maxwell's Demon: Why Warmth Disperses and Time Passes. Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-

43342-2.

External links [edit]



Look up entropy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Entropy for Beginners



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: An Intuitive Guide to the Concept of Entropy Arising in Various Sectors of Science



Wikiquote has quotations related to Entropy (thermodynamics).

"Entropy"

 at Scholarpedia

Entropy and the Clausius inequality

 MIT OCW lecture, part of 5.60 Thermodynamics &amp; Kinetics, Spring 2008

Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics

 – an A-level physics lecture with 'derivation' of entropy based on Carnot cycle

Khan Academy: entropy lectures, part of Chemistry playlist

Entropy Intuition

More on Entropy

Proof: S (or Entropy) is a valid state variable

Reconciling Thermodynamic and State Definitions of Entropy

Thermodynamic Entropy Definition Clarification

Moriarty, Philip; Merrifield, Michael (2009). "S Entropy"

. Sixty Symbols. Brady Haran for the University of Nottingham.

The Discovery of Entropy

 by Adam Shulman. Hour-long video, January 2013.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics and Entropy

 – Yale OYC lecture, part of Fundamentals of Physics I (PHYS 200)

Statistical mechanics

Theory

Principle of maximum entropy · ergodic theory

Statistical thermodynamics

Ensembles · partition functions · equations of state · thermodynamic potential: (U · H · F ·

G) · Maxwell relations


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 27 April 2023, at 14:13 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of

Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Models

Ferromagnetism models (Ising · Potts · Heisenberg · percolation) · Particles with force field

(depletion force · Lennard-Jones potential)



Mathematical approaches

Boltzmann equation · H-theorem · Vlasov equation · BBGKY hierarchy · stochastic process ·

mean-field theory and conformal field theory

Critical phenomena

Phase transition · Critical exponents (correlation length · size scaling)

Entropy

Boltzmann · Shannon · Tsallis · Rényi · von Neumann

Applications

Statistical field theory (elementary particle · superfluidity) · Condensed matter physics ·

Complex system (chaos · information theory · Boltzmann machine)

Authority control: National 



Spain  · France  · BnF data  · Germany  · Israel

 · United States

 · Japan  · Czech Republic

Categories: Entropy

Physical quantities

Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics

State functions

Asymmetry



