
From Google Assistant and Siri to chatbots on e-commerce sites, our interaction with Artificial Intelligence has increased significantly over

the past decade.



Natural Language Processing

These ‘bots’ that we interact with, almost daily are based on machine learning algorithms that equip them with the ability to understand

human language. 

Whether you’re chatting with them or speaking to them, they will be able to comprehend what you’re saying and come up with an

appropriate reply within seconds. 

It is almost like interacting with a human being, thanks to Natural Language Processing! 

Developers are working on improving the NLP algorithm to enhance the ability of bots to understand human language including the

sentiments used, emotions in statements, and much more!

Considering how challenging human language is and how differently each individual uses it to communicate, NLP has got a long way to

go to become fluid, consistent, and robust. Explore Why Natural Language Processing is Difficult here.



Why Natural Language Processing is Difficult



December 10, 2021

Why Natural Language Processing is Difficult – Considering how challenging human language is and how differently each individual uses

it.

blog

Muhammad Imran






Table of Contents

What Makes Natural Language Processing Difficult

Development Time:

Ambiguities:

Conclusion:

Muhammad Imran

What Makes Natural Language Processing Difficult

While the tool is a powerful one with significant limitations and benefits. 

Let’s dive into some of the challenges faced by NLP when processing human dialectal:

Development Time:

A task as complex as interpreting and responding to human language is not a simple one. 

Humans use words and phrases differently, speak with different accents, use idioms, metaphors, homophones, and several other

complexities of language. 

Considering this from a developer’s perspective, the task of developing an NLP becomes even more complicated. 

From evaluating billions of data points and adequately training the Artificial Intelligence, the development process is time-consuming. 

Using pre-existing NLP technologies might reduce the product building time. However, if not, then the developer will need to build the

product from scratch. 

Ambiguities:

In NLP, ambiguous phrases are those which can be interpreted in more than one way. The interpretation depends on the context the word

has been used in.

Some examples of ambiguity are:

Lexical Ambiguity: words that can be used as adjectives, nouns, and verbs.

Semantic Ambiguity: this refers to sentences that have different meanings in different contexts. 

For example, ‘I saw the boy with my binoculars.’ This could mean two things: either that the boy had my binoculars on, or that I saw him

using my binoculars.

Syntactic Ambiguity: the confusion is created because of the two meanings of the sentence given above. “saw” or the “boy” could be

modified by the phrase ‘with my binoculars’ to establish a clearer meaning. 

Spelling Errors:

Humans can easily solve spelling errors. We have the ability to understand the link between the misspelt word and the correctly spelt

equivalent. 

This means we can understand the remainder of the phrase easily by correcting the spelling errors in the sentence. 

However, a machine will find it more difficult to interpret a sentence with multiple spelling errors. A Natural Language Processing Sample

algorithm will be required to identify the typical misspellings, however, in some cases, it might also be unable to do so. 

Sarcasm:

NLPs face problems with sarcasm because the words typically used to express irony or sarcasm, could be positive or negative in

definition but they are used to create the opposite effect.

AI based on NLP cannot differentiate between the negative and positive meanings of words and phrases intended for sarcasm. 

Cues such as ‘yeah right, ‘whatever, etc. could be interpreted differently in several contexts. 

Colloquialisms and Slang:

Colloquialisms do not have a dictionary definition when used in formal language and the meanings of such words will vary based on the

geographical location. 




Cultural slang makes it even harder for AI to process and understand what it really means in different areas. 

Informal phrases, idioms, and expressions create challenges for NLPs since they are not advanced enough to interpret what a phrase

means in different territories. 

Conclusion:

The wide-ranging benefits that ML Solution brings to businesses are undeniable. 

Considering the latest versions springing up daily with new and more advanced developments, it is inevitable for this technology to

experience significant improvements over the coming years. 

About Muhammad Imran

Muhammad Imran is a regular content contributor at Folio3.Ai, In this growing technological era, I love to be updated

as a techy person. Writing on different technologies is my passion and understanding of new things that I can grow

with the world.

View all posts by Muhammad Imran

Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment * 

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

Post Comment

View Comments (0)

Previous Post


Next Post

Text Recognition Using Google Tesseract

December 7, 2021

blog


We're here for you!

Do you have any questions about Folio3's Ai service or product?

Contact us at +1 408 365-4638 or email us using the form below.

Full Name*

Work Email*

Job Title

Phone Number

Your Message*

Contact Us

By clicking above, you are authorizing Folio3 to contact and send you marketing communications. You are also agreeing to Folio3's

Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.

Subscribe to Our Newsletter

Email Address

Subscribe

Related Post

What is Semantic Analysis in Natural Language Processing – Explore Here

December 10, 2021

blog


Related Posts

Recent Posts

Recent Comments

Syed Haziq Ali on How to Find Out if Ai Learning Apps for Students Are Safe?



Best Free Speech to Text Software for Android, Windows and iOS



How Does ANPR for Barriers Work? (Simple Guide)



Top 5 Computer Vision Use Cases in Automotive in 2023



7 Real-Life Use Cases of Object Detection in 2023



Generative AI: 7 Steps to Grow with the AI Boom in 2023



Top 7 Use Cases for Facial Recognition in 2023

How Does ANPR for Barriers Work? (Simple Guide)

Top 5 Computer Vision Use Cases in Automotive in 2023

7 Real-Life Use Cases of Object Detection in 2023

Generative AI: 7 Steps to Grow with the AI Boom in 2023

Top 7 Use Cases for Facial Recognition in 2023






5 Best Natural Language Processing Packages in R Language

If you are looking to use Natural Language Processing in R applications, these are some of the best NLP packages you must know.



August 20, 2021

Read More

blog

Muhammad Imran



What is Staff Augmentation in Consulting

Learn What is Staff Augmentation in Consulting and how it allows you to extend your team for specialized projects.



May 31, 2022

Read More

blog

Muhammad Imran






Contact Us 

Ph: +1 408 365-4638

Email: contact@folio3.ai

Company

Industries

Solutions

Demo

In the News



Car Detection using OpenCV and Python within 5 minutes!

Today, you’ll explore an advanced vehicle detection system and classification project built with OpenCV in this article. The…



November 9, 2022

Read More

blog

Folio3 AI Editorial Team

