


Home

CHIRAG GOYAL — Published On July 19, 2021 and Last Modified On April 26th, 2023

Advanced Analytics Vidhya Maths Probability



2023’s Best Guide to Descriptive &amp; Generative Machine Learning Models









Introduction

In today’s world, Machine learning has become one of the popular and exciting fields of study. Machine learning

models can now learn and more accurately predict the outcomes for even unseen data. The ideas in Machine

learning overlap and receives from Artificial Intelligence

Artificial Intelligence and many other related technologies. Today, machine

learning is evolved from Pattern Recognition

Pattern Recognition and the concept that computers can learn without being explicitly

programmed to perform specific tasks. We can use Machine Learning algorithms (e.g., Logistic Regression

 Logistic Regression, Naive

Naive

Bayes

Bayes, etc.) to recognize spoken words, mine data, build applications that learn from data, and more. Moreover, the

accuracy of these algorithms increases over time.



Image Source: analyticsvidhya.com

Learning Objectives

Learning Objectives

Understand the fundamental discriminative and generative models

Understand the differences between discriminative and generative models and when to use each one

Explore the approach of the models

Explore some examples of discriminative and generative models

This article was published as a part of the Data Science Blogathon.

Table of Contents

Understanding Machine Learning Models

What Are Discriminative Models?

What Are Generative Models?

Difference Between Discriminative and Generative Models


Comparison Between Discriminative and Generative Models

Conclusion

Understanding Machine Learning Models

Machine learning models can be classified intotwo types: Discriminative and Generative. In simple words, a

discriminative model makes predictions on unseen data based on conditional probability and can be used either for

classification or regression problem statements. On the contrary, a generative model focuses on the distribution of

a dataset to return a probability for a given example.



Image Source: betterprogramming.pub

We, as humans, can adopt any of the two different approaches to machine learning models while learning an

artificial language. These two models have not previously been explored in human learning. However, it is related to

known effects of causal direction, classification vs. inference learning, and observational vs. feedback learning. So, In

this article, our focus is on two types of machine learning models – Generative

Generative and Discriminative,

Discriminative, and also see the

importance, comparisons, and differences of these two models.

Problem Formulation

Suppose we are working on a classification problem where our task is to decide if an email is spam or not spam based

on the words present in a particular email. To solve this problem, we have a joint model over.

Labels: Y=y

Y=y, and

Features: X={x

X={x11, x

, x22, …x

, …xnn}}

Therefore, the joint distribution of the model can be represented as

 p(Y,X) = P(y,x1,x2…xn)

Now, our goal is to estimate the probability of spam email i.e., P(Y=1|X)

P(Y=1|X). Both generative and discriminative models

can solve this problem but in different ways.

Let’s see why and how they are different!

The Approach of Generative Models

In the case of generative models, to find the conditional probability P(Y|X)

 P(Y|X), they estimate the priorprobability P(Y)

P(Y)

and likelihood probability P(X|Y) 

P(X|Y) with the help of the training data and use the Bayes Theorem to calculate the


posterior probability P(Y |X):

P(Y |X):



The Approach of Discriminative Models

In the case of discriminative models, to find the probability, they directly assume some functional form for P(Y|X)

P(Y|X)

andthen estimate the parameters of P(Y|X)

P(Y|X) with the help of the training data.

What Are Discriminative Models?

The discriminative model refers to a class of models used in Statistical Classification

Statistical Classification, mainly used for supervised

machine learning. These types of models are also known as conditional models

conditional models since they learn the boundaries

between classes or labels in a dataset.

Discriminative models focus on modeling the decision boundary between classes in a classification problem. The

goal is to learn a function that maps inputs to binary outputs, indicating the class label of the input. Maximum

likelihood estimation is often used to estimate the parameters of the discriminative model, such as the coefficients

of a logistic regression model or the weights of a neural network.

Discriminative models (just as in the literal meaning) separate classes instead of modeling the conditional

probability and don’t make any assumptions about the data points. But these models are not capable of generating

new data points. Therefore, the ultimate objective of discriminative models is to separate one class from another.

If we have some outliers present in the dataset, discriminative models work better compared to generative models

i.e., discriminative models are more robust to outliers. However, one major drawback of these models is the

misclassification problem

misclassification problem, i.e., wrongly classifying a data point.



Image Source: medium.com

The Mathematics of Discriminative Models

​Training discriminative classifiers or discriminant analysis involves estimating a function f: X -&gt; Y

 f: X -&gt; Y, or probability


P(Y|X)

P(Y|X)

Assume some functional form for the probability, such as P(Y|X)

P(Y|X)

With the help of training data, we estimate the parameters of P(Y|X)

P(Y|X)

Examples of Discriminative Models

​Logistic regression

Support vector machines(SVMs)

​Traditional neural networks

​Nearest neighbor

Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)

Decision Trees and Random Forest

What Are Generative Models?

Generative models are considered a class of statistical models that can generate new data instances. These models

are used in unsupervised machine learning as a means to perform tasks such as

Probability and Likelihood estimation,

Modeling data points

To describe the phenomenon in data,

To distinguish between classes based on these probabilities.

Since these models often rely on the Bayes theorem to find the joint probability, generative models can tackle a

more complex task than analogous discriminative models.

So, the Generative approach focuses on the distribution of individual classes in a dataset, and the learning

algorithms tend to model the underlying patterns or distribution of the data points (e.g., gaussian). These models

use the concept of joint probability and create instances where a given feature (

feature (xx) ) or input and the desired output or

label (

label (yy)) exist simultaneously.

These models use probability estimates

probability estimates and likelihood

likelihood to model data points and differentiate between different

class labels present in a dataset. Unlike discriminative models, these models can also generate new data points.

However, they also have a major drawback – If there is a presence of outliers in the dataset, then it affects these

types of models to a significant extent.




Image Source: medium.com

The Mathematics of Generative Models

​Training generative classifiers involve estimating a function f: X -&gt; Y

f: X -&gt; Y, or probability P(Y|X):

P(Y|X):

Assume some functional form for the probabilities such as P(Y), P(X|Y)

P(Y), P(X|Y)

With the help of training data, we estimate the parameters of P(X|Y), P(Y)

P(X|Y), P(Y)

Use the Bayes theorem to calculate the posterior probability P(Y |X)

P(Y |X)

Examples of Generative Models

​Naïve Bayes

Bayesian networks

Markov random fields

​Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)

Autoregressive Model

Difference Between Discriminative and Generative Models

Let’s see some of the differences between the Discriminative and Generative Models.

Core Idea

Core Idea

Discriminative models draw boundaries in the data space, while generative models try to model how data is placed

throughout the space. A generative model explains how the data was generated, while a discriminative model

focuses on predicting the labels of the data.

Mathematical Intuition

Mathematical Intuition

In mathematical terms, discriminative machine learning trains a model, which is done by learning parameters that

maximize the conditional probability P(Y|X). 

 P(Y|X). On the other hand, a generative model learns parameters by


maximizing the joint probability of P(X, Y)

 P(X, Y).

Applications

Applications

Discriminative models recognize existing data, i.e., discriminative modeling identifies tags and sorts data and can be

used to classify data, while Generative modeling produces something.

Since these models use different approaches to machine learning, both are suited for specific tasks i.e., Generative

models are useful for unsupervised learning tasks. In contrast, discriminative models are useful for supervised

learning tasks. GANs(Generative adversarial networks) can be thought of as a competition between the generator,

which is a component of the generative model, and the discriminator, so basically, it is generative vs. discriminative

model.

Outliers

Outliers

Generative models have more impact on outliers than discriminative models.

Computational Cost

Computational Cost

Discriminative models are computationally cheap as compared to generative models.

Comparison Between Discriminative and Generative Models

Let’s see some of the comparisons based on the following criteria between Discriminative and Generative Models:

Based on Performance

Based on Performance

Generative models need fewer data to train compared with discriminative models since generative models are more

biased as they make stronger assumptions, i.e., assumption of conditional independence

assumption of conditional independence.

Based on Missing Data

Based on Missing Data

In general, if we have missing data in our dataset, then Generative models can work with these missing data, while

discriminative models can’t. This is because, in generative models, we can still estimate the posterior by

marginalizing the unseen variables. However, discriminative models usually require all the features X to be

observed.

Based on the Accuracy Score

Based on the Accuracy Score

If the assumption of conditional independence violates, then at that time, generative models are less accurate than

discriminative models.

Based on Applications

Based on Applications

Discriminative models are called “discriminative”

“discriminative” since they are useful for discriminating Y’s label, i.e., target

outcome, so they can only solve classification problems. In contrast, Generative models have more applications

besides classification, such as samplings, Bayes learning, MAP inference, etc.

Conclusion

In conclusion, discriminative and generative models are two basic approaches to machine learning that have been


used to solve various tasks. The discriminative approach focuses on learning the decision boundary between classes,

while generative models are used to model the underlying data distribution. Understanding the difference between

discriminative and generative models helps us to make better decisions about which approach to use for a particular

task to build a more accurate machine-learning solution.

Key Takeaways

Key Takeaways

Discriminative models learn the decision boundary between classes, while generative models aim to model the

underlying data distribution.

Discriminative models are often simpler and faster to train than generative models but may not perform as well

on tasks where the underlying data distribution is complex or uncertain.

Generative models can be used for a wider range of tasks, including image and text generation, but may require

more training data and computational resources.

Frequently Asked Questions

Q1. What is the difference between discriminative and probabilistic models?

Q1. What is the difference between discriminative and probabilistic models?

A. Discriminative models focus on modeling the decision boundary between classes, while probabilistic models

focus on modeling the underlying probability distribution of the data.

Q2. What is the difference between generative and discriminative models in deep learning?

Q2. What is the difference between generative and discriminative models in deep learning?

A. Discriminative models focus on modeling the decision boundary between classes. Given input data, the goal is to

predict a specific class label. On the other hand, generative models focus on modeling the joint distribution of inputs

and outputs. Given input data, the goal is to generate realistic output data that belong to the same distribution as

the training data.

Q3. Are discriminative models used for classification tasks?

Q3. Are discriminative models used for classification tasks?

A. Discriminative models are used for classification tasks, where the goal is to predict the class label of an input

based on some features. They are designed to model the decision boundary between classes rather than modeling

the distribution of the data.

The media shown in this article are not owned by Analytics Vidhya and are used at the Author’s discretion.

The media shown in this article are not owned by Analytics Vidhya and are used at the Author’s discretion.

Related




blogathon

Discriminative Models

generative models





About the Author

CHIRAG GOYAL

I am currently pursuing my Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech) in Computer Science and Engineering from the Indian Institute of

Technology Jodhpur(IITJ). I am very enthusiastic about Machine learning, Deep Learning, and Artificial Intelligence. Feel free to

connect with me on Linkedin.





Our Top Authors

Download Analytics Vidhya App for the Latest blog/Article







view more

Next Post

Give Hermione Granger a Cool Pair of Glasses by building Snapchat Filter using OpenCV


Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

 Notify me of new posts by email.



Submit

Top Resources



Comment



Name*



Email*



Website








© Copyright 2013-2023 Analytics Vidhya.

Privacy &amp; Cookies Policy





Make Money While Sleeping: Side Hustles to Generate Passive Income..

Aayush Tyagi - APR 27, 2023





From Zero to Millionaire: Generate Passive Income using ChatGPT

Aravindpai Pai - APR 17, 2023





FreedomGPT: Personal, Bold and Uncensored Chatbot Running Locally on Your..

K.sabreena - APR 08, 2023





Understand Random Forest Algorithms With Examples (Updated 2023)

Sruthi E R - JUN 17, 2021

Privacy Policy Terms of Use Refund Policy

