


 



 



 

Next: References Up: Universal Portfolios With and Previous: Semi-constant-rebalanced Portfolios 

Application to Statistical Language Modeling

Analogies between universal compression and the UNIVERSAL algorithm have been made by Cover [5]. The 



 portfolio algorithm of [10]

has also been used for finding the best mixture of predictive models [12, 11]. We would like to explicitly present an analogy between stocks and

language models which shows how the UNIVERSAL algorithm can be applied to language models and other predictors. This analogy is more

general than Kelly's racehorse analogy because it covers price relatives other than just 



 .

A statistical language model is a probability distribution over sequences of words. A language model is generally represented as a conditional

probability distribution for the next word to be seen, given the previous words, i.e.,



The most common way to combine various language models is to linearly interpolate them. A mixture of three language models, for example a

unigram model 



 , a bigram model 



 , and a trigram model 



 might be,





This is similar to a CRP. If we consider the analogy between language models and stocks, where a price relative 



 corresponds to a conditional

probability 



 and a portfolio 



 corresponds to a daily mixture of language models, then the probability that a combined language model

algorithm assigns to a sequence 



 is simply the value of the holdings of the corresponding portfolio algorithm. The log of the

probability assigned to the observed sequence is a common measure of a language model's performance. This leads us to the following algorithm.

Given language models 



 and a sequence of words 



 , if UNIVERSAL invests its money based on portfolios 



when observing price relatives 



 , then the universal language model P predicts





This follows directly from the observation that the wealth of a portfolio algorithm is exactly the probability it assigns to the word sequence. It is

impressive because it shows how these mixture parameters can be ``learned'' on the fly with on-line guarantees. Furthermore, the amortized cost of



 bits per word is a small overhead as n gets large. It also helps to explain a relationship between portfolios and weighted-

average-type algorithms for making predictions from expert advice [1, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15].



 



 



 

Next: References Up: Universal Portfolios With and Previous: Semi-constant-rebalanced Portfolios 

Adam Kalai 

Thu May 22 12:27:38 EDT 1997

