
CORPORATE FINANCE

CORPORATE FINANCE FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

Investopedia / Lara Antal

Bayes' Theorem: What It Is, the Formula, and Examples

Bayes' Theorem: What It Is, the Formula, and Examples

By  ADAM HAYES

ADAM HAYES  Updated March 01, 2022

Reviewed by  PETER WESTFALL

PETER WESTFALL

Fact checked by  AMANDA BELLUCCO-CHATHAM

AMANDA BELLUCCO-CHATHAM

What Is Bayes' Theorem?

What Is Bayes' Theorem?

Bayes' Theorem, named after 18th-century British mathematician Thomas Bayes, is a mathematical formula for

determining conditional probability. Conditional probability is the likelihood of an outcome occurring, based on a

previous outcome having occurred in similar circumstances. Bayes' theorem provides a way to revise existing

predictions or theories (update probabilities) given new or additional evidence.

In finance, Bayes' Theorem can be used to rate the risk of lending money to potential borrowers. The theorem is

also called Bayes' Rule or Bayes' Law and is the foundation of the field of Bayesian statistics.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Bayes' Theorem allows you to update the predicted probabilities of an event by incorporating new

information.

Bayes' Theorem was named after 18th-century mathematician Thomas Bayes.



TRADE

TRADE


Understanding Bayes' Theorem

Understanding Bayes' Theorem

Applications of Bayes' Theorem are widespread and not limited to the financial realm. For example, Bayes'

theorem can be used to determine the accuracy of medical test results by taking into consideration how likely any

given person is to have a disease and the general accuracy of the test. Bayes' theorem relies on incorporating prior

probability distributions in order to generate posterior probabilities.

Prior probability, in Bayesian statistical inference, is the probability of an event occurring before new data is

collected. In other words, it represents the best rational assessment of the probability of a particular outcome

based on current knowledge before an experiment is performed.

Posterior probability is the revised probability of an event occurring after taking into consideration the new

information. Posterior probability is calculated by updating the prior probability using Bayes' theorem. In

statistical terms, the posterior probability is the probability of event A occurring given that event B has occurred.

Special Considerations

Special Considerations

Bayes' Theorem thus gives the probability of an event based on new information that is, or may be, related to that

event. The formula can also be used to determine how the probability of an event occurring may be affected by

hypothetical new information, supposing the new information will turn out to be true.

For instance, consider drawing a single card from a complete deck of 52 cards.

The probability that the card is a king is four divided by 52, which equals 1/13 or approximately 7.69%. Remember

that there are four kings in the deck. Now, suppose it is revealed that the selected card is a face card. The

probability the selected card is a king, given it is a face card, is four divided by 12, or approximately 33.3%, as there

are 12 face cards in a deck.

Formula for Bayes' Theorem

Formula for Bayes' Theorem

It is often employed in finance in calculating or updating risk evaluation.

The theorem has become a useful element in the implementation of machine learning.

The theorem was unused for two centuries because of the high volume of calculation capacity required to

execute its transactions.


Examples of Bayes' Theorem

Examples of Bayes' Theorem

Below are two examples of Bayes' Theorem in which the first example shows how the formula can be derived in a

stock investing example using Amazon.com Inc. (AMZN). The second example applies Bayes' theorem to

pharmaceutical drug testing.

Deriving the Bayes' Theorem Formula

Deriving the Bayes' Theorem Formula

Bayes' Theorem follows simply from the axioms of conditional probability. Conditional probability is the

probability of an event given that another event occurred. For example, a simple probability question may ask:

"What is the probability of Amazon.com's stock price falling?" Conditional probability takes this question a step

further by asking: "What is the probability of AMZN stock price falling given that the Dow Jones Industrial Average

(DJIA) index fell earlier?"

The conditional probability of A given that B has happened can be expressed as:

If A is: "AMZN price falls" then P(AMZN) is the probability that AMZN falls; and B is: "DJIA is already down," and

P(DJIA) is the probability that the DJIA fell; then the conditional probability expression reads as "the probability

that AMZN drops given a DJIA decline is equal to the probability that AMZN price declines and DJIA declines over

the probability of a decrease in the DJIA index.

P(AMZN|DJIA) = P(AMZN and DJIA) / P(DJIA)

P(AMZN and DJIA) is the probability of both A and B occurring. This is also the same as the probability of A

occurring multiplied by the probability that B occurs given that A occurs, expressed as P(AMZN) x P(DJIA|AMZN).

The fact that these two expressions are equal leads to Bayes' theorem, which is written as:

if, P(AMZN and DJIA) = P(AMZN) x P(DJIA|AMZN) = P(DJIA) x P(AMZN|DJIA)

then, P(AMZN|DJIA) = [P(AMZN) x P(DJIA|AMZN)] / P(DJIA).


Where P(AMZN) and P(DJIA) are the probabilities of Amazon and the Dow Jones falling, without regard to each

other.

The formula explains the relationship between the probability of the hypothesis before seeing the evidence that

P(AMZN), and the probability of the hypothesis after getting the evidence P(AMZN|DJIA), given a hypothesis for

Amazon given evidence in the Dow.

Numerical Example of Bayes' Theorem

Numerical Example of Bayes' Theorem

As a numerical example, imagine there is a drug test that is 98% accurate, meaning that 98% of the time, it shows

a true positive result for someone using the drug, and 98% of the time, it shows a true negative result for nonusers

of the drug.

Next, assume 0.5% of people use the drug. If a person selected at random tests positive for the drug, the following

calculation can be made to determine the probability the person is actually a user of the drug.

(0.98 x 0.005) / [(0.98 x 0.005) + ((1 - 0.98) x (1 - 0.005))] = 0.0049 / (0.0049 + 0.0199) = 19.76%

Bayes' Theorem shows that even if a person tested positive in this scenario, there is a roughly 80% chance the

person does not take the drug.

What Is the History of Bayes' Theorem?

What Is the History of Bayes' Theorem?

The theorem was discovered among the papers of the English Presbyterian minister and mathematician Thomas

Bayes and published posthumously by being read to the Royal Society in 1763. Long ignored in favor of Boolean

calculations, Bayes' Theorem has recently become more popular due to increased calculation capacity for

performing its complex calculations.

These advances have led to an increase in applications using Bayes' theorem. It is now applied to a wide variety of

probability calculations, including financial calculations, genetics, drug use, and disease control.

What Does Bayes' Theorem State?

What Does Bayes' Theorem State?

Bayes' Theorem states that the conditional probability of an event, based on the occurrence of another event, is

equal to the likelihood of the second event given the first event multiplied by the probability of the first event.

What Is Calculated in Bayes' Theorem?

What Is Calculated in Bayes' Theorem?

Bayes' Theorem calculates the conditional probability of an event, based on the values of specific related known

probabilities.

What Is a Bayes' Theorem Calculator?

What Is a Bayes' Theorem Calculator?

A Bayes’ Theorem Calculator figures the probability of an event A conditional on another event B, given the prior

probabilities of A and B, and the probability of B conditional on A. It calculates conditional probabilities based on

known probabilities.

How Is Bayes' Theorem Used in Machine Learning?

How Is Bayes' Theorem Used in Machine Learning?

Bayes Theorem provides a useful method for thinking about the relationship between a data set and a probability.

In other words, the theorem says that the probability of a given hypothesis being true based on specific observed

data can be stated as finding the probability of observing the data given the hypothesis multiplied by the


probability of the hypothesis being true regardless of the data, divided by the probability of observing the data

regardless of the hypothesis.

The Bottom Line

The Bottom Line

At its simplest, Bayes' Theorem takes a test result and relates it to the conditional probability of that test result

given other related events. For high probability false positives, the Theorem gives a more reasoned likelihood of a

particular outcome.

Related Terms

Prior Probability: Examples and Calculations of Economic Theory

Prior probability, in Bayesian statistical inference, is the probability of an event based on established knowledge, before

empirical data is collected. more

Conditional Probability: Formula and Real-Life Examples

Conditional probability is the likelihood of an event or outcome occurring based on the occurrence of some other previous event

or outcome. more

Posterior Probability: Definition, Formula for Calculation

Posterior probability is the revised probability of an event occurring after taking into consideration new information. more

Binomial Distribution: Definition, Formula, Analysis, and Example

Binomial distribution is a statistical probability distribution that summarizes the likelihood that a value will take one of two

independent values. more

Goodness-of-Fit

A goodness-of-fit test helps you see if your sample data is accurate or somehow skewed. Discover how the popular chi-square

goodness-of-fit test works. more

Joint Probability: Definition, Formula, and Example

Joint probability is a statistical measure that calculates the likelihood of two events occurring together and at the same point in

time. Joint probability is the probability of event Y occurring at the same time that event X occurs. more

Partner Links


Related Articles

Tools

The Bayesian Method of Financial Forecasting

Trading Psychology

The Math Behind Betting Odds and Gambling

Mortgage

Mortgage Calculator

Financial Literacy Resource Center

How to Inspire a Love of Math

Trading Basic Education

Hypothesis Testing in Finance: Concept and Examples


About Us

Terms of Use

Dictionary

Editorial Policy

Advertise

News

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Careers

Do Not Sell My Personal Information

Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.

Podcast Episodes

Inside the Rise and Fall of America's Greatest Corporate Empire

