


Techniques and Applications of Text Analytics



Here we present to you everything about text analysis.

The fast growth of digital texts necessitates the usage of text analytics. It raises the issue of devising a more intelligent method of reading and

comprehending materials and eventually obtaining information from them. Read on to learn more about text analytics along with its

techniques and applications.  

What is Text Analytics?

The act of converting unstructured text documents into useful, organized data is known as text analytics. Text analysis works by dissecting

words and phrases into their constituent parts and assessing the role and significance of each portion using complicated software rules and

Analytics . Latest News

Madhurjya Chowdhury

August 14, 2021 .  4 mins read





Search





Menu






machine learning techniques. Text analytics used to be limited to simple tasks like determining word frequencies. AI technologies such as

natural language understanding (NLU) and MI, as well as approaches such as deep learning, have significantly increased the efficacy of text

analytics in recent years.  

Techniques of Text Analytics

1. Clustering One of the most important text mining approaches is clustering. Its goal is to find inherent patterns in textual data and arrange

them into pertinent subgroups or ‘clusters’ for further study. The creation of meaningful clusters from unmarked textual material without any

prior knowledge is a key problem in the clustering process. Cluster analysis is a common text mining method that aids in data distribution or

serves as a pre-processing phase for other text mining techniques that operate on clusters that have been discovered.   2. Summarization

The technique of automatically creating a compressed version of a given text that contains useful information for the end-user is known as

text summarization. This text mining approach tries to search numerous text sources for abstracts of texts that provide a significant amount

of information in a compact style while maintaining the original documents’ general sense and intent. Text summarization combines and

incorporates numerous text classification approaches such as decision trees, neural networks, logistic regression, and swarm optimization.  

3. Information Extraction This is the most widely used text mining method. The process of extracting relevant information from large

amounts of textual material is referred to as information exchange. The goal of this text mining approach is to extract entities, characteristics,

and their connections from semi-structured or unstructured texts. Whatever data is collected is then saved in a database for easy access

and retrieval in the long term. Precision and recall methods are used to examine and enhance the effectiveness and relevance of the outputs.

 4. Categorization This is a type of “supervised” learning in which regular language texts are allocated to a pre-set set of subjects based

on their content using text mining techniques. As a result, categorization, or Natural Language Processing (NLP), is the act of gathering

textual data and processing and analyzing them to find the appropriate themes or indexes for each one.  

Application of Text Analytics

1. Fraud Detection Text analytics, along with text mining techniques, presents a huge potential for domains that collect the entirety of their

data in text format. This is an opportunity that insurance and finance businesses are seizing. These businesses are now capable of processing

claims quickly as well as preventing and detecting fraud by integrating the results of text analysis with pertinent structured data.   2. Social

Media Analysis Many text mining methods have been developed specifically for assessing the performance of social media sites. These

aid with the tracking and interpretation of online content created by the news, blogs, emails, and other sources. Text mining technologies

can also quickly evaluate the number of posts, likes, and connections your brand has on social media, helping you to better understand how

people are reacting to your company and online content. The research will help you figure out “what’s popular and what isn’t” for your

target market.   3. Customer Care Service In the realm of customer service, text mining applications, notably natural language processing

(NLP), are becoming increasingly important. Companies are adopting text analytics tools to improve their entire customer experience by

gaining access to textual data from a variety of sources, including surveys, user feedback, and user conversations, among others. Text

analysis seeks to minimize the company’s reaction time and assist in quickly and efficiently resolving client complaints.   4. Knowledge

Management Managing a large volume of text data has become a difficulty in several areas, such as healthcare. It would certainly fly to

the moon if you began designing systems and kept all of the papers relevant to healthcare on a single upwardly scalable rack. The amount

of data collected per hour is enormous. All of this information must be kept in such a way that it may be accessed whenever it is needed.

It’s possible that an epidemic could break out, and hospitals will need to work together to analyze all of their data in order to locate the

source or the first affected individual.   5. Risk Management The absence of appropriate or inadequate risk analysis is one of the leading

reasons for company failure. Implementing and adopting risk management tools based on text mining technologies, like SAS Text Miner,

may assist organizations in staying current with industry trends and enhancing their ability to mitigate possible hazards. Because text mining

tools and technologies can aggregate relevant data from hundreds of text data sources and build linkages between the retrieved insights,

they enable companies to access the appropriate information at the right time, therefore improving the risk management framework.  


Conclusion

During the projected period, the text analytics market is expected to expand by USD 8.77 billion, representing a CAGR of over 20%. The

text analytics market has been unaffected by the worldwide shutdown since most IT activities are conducted through a ‘working from

home’ framework. As a result, there is a continual need for text analytics in its application business all over the world. During the

Coronavirus epidemic, text analytics has shown to be useful in the healthcare industry for examining information on the epidemic. Text

analytics is a type of software that aids in the creation of organized text data from unstructured text, as well as the discovery of trends,

insights, and trends.



 FACEBOOK 0 



 TWITTER 0 



 LINKEDIN 0 





 EMAIL 0

Text Analytics

881 Views | 0 Like

Disclaimer: All the Crypto articles are contributed by third-party and does not have editorial involvement of Analytics Insight. Analytics

Insight does not endorse/ subscribe to the contents of the article/advertisement and/or views expressed herein. Readers are advised that

Cryptocurrency and related products and NFTs are unregulated and can be highly risky. There may be no regulatory recourse for any loss

from such transactions/views expressed in the article. Analytics Insight shall not in any manner, be responsible and/or liable in any manner

whatsoever for all that is stated in the article and/or also with regard to the views, opinions, announcements, declarations, affirmations etc.,

stated/featured in same. The decision to read hereinafter is purely a matter of choice and shall be construed as an express

undertaking/guarantee in favour of Analytics Insight of being absolved from any/ all potential legal action, or enforceable claims. The content

is for information and awareness purposes and does not constitute a financial advice.

PREV

Top 8 YouTube Channels to Gather Know

4

NEXT

Are Cryptocurrencies Really Profitable Inve


You May Also Like

5



MAGAZINES



1

Sparklo (SPRK) to Leave Neo (NEO) and Nexo (NEXO) Behind as It Gears for the Moon

 

 

Cryptocurrency . Sponsored





2

Hong Kong’s Thriving Web3 Ecosystem Offers Opportunities for BTC, EcoTerra, and

Signuptoken.com Amidst China’s Anti-Crypto Policies

 

 

Cryptocurrency . Sponsored





3

Will Meme Coins Continue to Dominate the Market in 2023? Analysing Dogecoin, Shiba Inu, and

Big Eyes Coin

 

 

Cryptocurrency . Sponsored





4

Chinese Behemoth Huawei is Also Entering the AI Chatbot Race

 

 

Chatbots . Latest News




PICKED STORIES



10 Ways to Earn Up to US$500 a Day using ChatGPT

 

 

 

Artificial Intelligence . ChatGPT . Latest News





Experts Predict that the Shiba Inu Will be Worth $10 by 2024.

 

 

Cryptocurrency . Latest News






About Us



Analytics Insight® is an influential platform dedicated to insights, trends, and opinion from the world of data-driven technologies. It

monitors developments, recognition, and achievements made by Artificial Intelligence, Big Data and Analytics companies across the

globe.













What Are the Upcoming Trends in AI in Healthcare for 2020?

 

 

 

Artificial Intelligence . Healthcare . Latest News














Links



Select Language:

About AI

Know Us

Privacy Policy

Media Kit

Content Licensing

Terms &amp; Conditions

Reach Us

Contact Us

Submit an Interview

Advertise

Career

Sitemap

Special Editions

40 Under 40 Innovators


Women In Technology

Top 100

Market Reports

AI Glossary

Podcast

Infographics

Latest Issue

SUBSCRIBE

Disclaimer: Any financial and crypto market information given on Analytics Insight is written for informational purpose only and is not an investment advise. Conduct

your own research by contacting financial experts before making any investment decisions.

© 2022 Analytics Insight. All Rights reserved.

