
Shannon's source coding theorem

Toggle the table of contents



 15

languages

Article

Talk

Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Information theory



Entropy · Differential entropy · Conditional entropy · Joint entropy · Mutual information · Directed information · Conditional mutual information ·

Relative entropy · Entropy rate · Limiting density of discrete points

Asymptotic equipartition property · Rate–distortion theory

Shannon's source coding theorem · Channel capacity · Noisy-channel coding theorem · Shannon–Hartley theorem

v · t · e

This article is about the theory of source coding in data compression. For the term in computer programming, see Source code.

In information theory, Shannon's source coding theorem (or noiseless coding theorem) establishes the limits to possible data

compression, and the operational meaning of the Shannon entropy.

Named after Claude Shannon, the source coding theorem shows that (in the limit, as the length of a stream of independent and

identically-distributed random variable (i.i.d.) data tends to infinity) it is impossible to compress the data such that the code rate

(average number of bits per symbol) is less than the Shannon entropy of the source, without it being virtually certain that information

will be lost. However it is possible to get the code rate arbitrarily close to the Shannon entropy, with negligible probability of loss.

The source coding theorem for symbol codes places an upper and a lower bound on the minimal possible expected length of

codewords as a function of the entropy of the input word (which is viewed as a random variable) and of the size of the target alphabet.

Statements [edit]

Source coding is a mapping from (a sequence of) symbols from an information source to a sequence of alphabet symbols (usually bits)

such that the source symbols can be exactly recovered from the binary bits (lossless source coding) or recovered within some

distortion (lossy source coding). This is the concept behind data compression.

Source coding theorem [edit]

In information theory, the source coding theorem (Shannon 1948)[1] informally states that (MacKay 2003, pg. 81,[2] Cover 2006,

Chapter 5[3]):

N i.i.d. random variables each with entropy H(X) can be compressed into more than N H(X) bits with negligible risk of

information loss, as N → ∞; but conversely, if they are compressed into fewer than N H(X) bits it is virtually certain that

information will be lost.

The 

 coded sequence represents the compressed message in a biunivocal way, under the assumption that the decoder knows

the source. From a practical point of view, this hypothesis is not always true. Consequently, when the entropy encoding is applied the

transmitted message is 

. Usually, the information that characterizes the source is inserted at the beginning of the

transmitted message.

Source coding theorem for symbol codes [edit]

Let Σ1, Σ2 denote two finite alphabets and let Σ∗

1 and Σ∗

2 denote the set of all finite words from those alphabets (respectively).

Suppose that X is a random variable taking values in Σ1 and let  f  be a uniquely decodable code from Σ∗

1 to Σ∗

2 where |Σ2| = a. Let S

denote the random variable given by the length of codeword  f (X).








If  f  is optimal in the sense that it has the minimal expected word length for X, then (Shannon 1948):

Where  denotes the expected value operator.

Proof: Source coding theorem [edit]

Given X is an i.i.d. source, its time series X1, ..., Xn is i.i.d. with entropy H(X) in the discrete-valued case and differential entropy in the

continuous-valued case. The Source coding theorem states that for any ε &gt; 0, i.e. for any rate H(X) + ε larger than the entropy of the

source, there is large enough n and an encoder that takes n i.i.d. repetition of the source, X1:n, and maps it to n(H(X) + ε) binary bits

such that the source symbols X1:n are recoverable from the binary bits with probability of at least 1 − ε.

Proof of Achievability. Fix some ε &gt; 0, and let

The typical set, Aε

n, is defined as follows:

The Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP) shows that for large enough n, the probability that a sequence generated by the source

lies in the typical set, Aε

n, as defined approaches one. In particular, for sufficiently large n, 

 can be made arbitrarily

close to 1, and specifically, greater than 

 (See AEP for a proof).

The definition of typical sets implies that those sequences that lie in the typical set satisfy:

Note that:

The probability of a sequence 

 being drawn from Aε

n is greater than 1 − ε.

, which follows from the left hand side (lower bound) for 

.

, which follows from upper bound for 

 and the lower bound on the total probability of the whole set Aε

n.

Since 

 bits are enough to point to any string in this set.

The encoding algorithm: The encoder checks if the input sequence lies within the typical set; if yes, it outputs the index of the input

sequence within the typical set; if not, the encoder outputs an arbitrary n(H(X) + ε) digit number. As long as the input sequence lies

within the typical set (with probability at least 1 − ε), the encoder doesn't make any error. So, the probability of error of the encoder is

bounded above by ε.

Proof of Converse. The converse is proved by showing that any set of size smaller than Aε

n (in the sense of exponent) would cover a

set of probability bounded away from 1.

Proof: Source coding theorem for symbol codes [edit]

For 1 ≤ i ≤ n let si denote the word length of each possible xi. Define 

, where C is chosen so that q1 + ... + qn = 1. Then

where the second line follows from Gibbs' inequality and the fifth line follows from Kraft's inequality:

so log C ≤ 0.

For the second inequality we may set

so that

and so


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 19 March 2023, at 20:35 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of

Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

and

and so by Kraft's inequality there exists a prefix-free code having those word lengths. Thus the minimal S satisfies

Extension to non-stationary independent sources [edit]

Fixed Rate lossless source coding for discrete time non-stationary independent sources [edit]

Define typical set Aε

n as:

Then, for given δ &gt; 0, for n large enough, Pr(Aε

n) &gt; 1 − δ. Now we just encode the sequences in the typical set, and usual methods in

source coding show that the cardinality of this set is smaller than 

. Thus, on an average, Hn(X) + ε bits suffice for encoding with

probability greater than 1 − δ, where ε and δ can be made arbitrarily small, by making n larger.

See also [edit]

Channel coding

Noisy-channel coding theorem

Error exponent

Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP)

References [edit]

1. ^ C.E. Shannon, "



A Mathematical Theory of Communication

", Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623-656, July,

October, 1948

2. ^ David J. C. MacKay. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-

521-64298-1

3. ^ Cover, Thomas M. (2006). "Chapter 5: Data Compression". Elements of Information Theory . John Wiley &amp; Sons. pp. 103–142. ISBN 0-

471-24195-4.

Categories: Information theory

Coding theory

Data compression

Presentation layer protocols

Mathematical theorems in theoretical computer science



