
Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis Applied to Whole 

Bacterial Genomes Identifies Common Genomic Features 

Rusakovica, J., Hallinan, J., Wipat, A., and Zuliani, P. 

School of Computing Science, and Centre for Synthetic Biology and Bioexploitation, 

Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK 

Summary 

The spread of drug resistance amongst clinically-important bacteria is a serious, and growing, 

problem. However, the analysis of entire genomes requires considerable computational effort, usually 

including the assembly of the genome and subsequent identification of genes known to be important 

in pathology. An alternative approach is to use computational algorithms to identify genomic 

differences between pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria, even without knowing the biological 

meaning of those differences. To overcome this problem, a range of techniques for dimensionality 

reduction have been developed. One such approach is known as latent semantic analysis (LSA). In 

latent-variable models dimensionality reduction is achieved by representing a high-dimensional data 

by a few hidden or latent variables, which are not directly observed but inferred from the observed 

variables present in the model. Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (PLSA) is an extension of 

LSA. PLSA is based on a mixture decomposition derived from a latent class model. The main 

objective of the algorithm, as in LSA, is to represent high-dimensional co-occurrence information in a 

lower-dimensional way in order to discover the hidden semantic structure of the data using a 

probabilistic framework. 

 

In this work we applied the PLSA approach to analyse the common genomic features in methicillin 

resistant Staphylococcus aureus, using tokens derived from amino acid sequences rather than DNA. 

We characterised genome-scale amino acid sequences in terms of their components, and then 

investigated the relationships between genomes and tokens and the phenotypes they generated. As a 

control we used the non-pathogenic model Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. 

 

 

1.  Introduction 

The spread of drug resistance amongst clinically-important bacteria is a serious, and growing, 

problem [1]. Bacteria can acquire resistance to a range of drugs via the transmission of 

cassettes of drug resistance genes carried on plasmids. In order to treat patients effectively, 

and reduce the unnecessary use of antibiotics, rapid identification of the resistance status of 

the bacteria involved in an infection is essential. Currently, this process involves taking 

samples from the patient and growing up the bacteria involved in the presence of a range of 

different antibiotics. This process is slow and labour intensive, and provides information only 

about the specific antibiotics tested. The advent of relatively cheap, rapid DNA sequencing 

has led to the possibility of using this information for analysing the antibiotic resistance status 

of bacteria directly from their genomes [2, 3]. However, the analysis of entire genomes 


requires considerable computational effort, usually including the assembly of the genome and 

subsequent identification of genes known to be important in pathology. An alternative 

approach is to use computational algorithms to identify genomic differences between 

pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria, even without knowing the biological meaning of 

those differences. 

The concept of a pan-genome was first introduced in 2005 by Medini et al. [4], who proposed 

that a microbial assemblage can be considered to comprise a single common genome, rather 

than being a collection of individual genomes. Medini et al. divided the pan-genome into two 

groups: genes common to all species, the core genome; and genes present in only some of the 

species, the peripheral genome. The peripheral genome is further divided into genes unique to 

a particular species or strain, and those shared between a fraction of the population. Genes in 

the core genome are those responsible for basic maintenance common to all bacteria, while 

those in the peripheral genome adapt individual species to the particular environmental niche 

in which they exist [5]. As environments change, peripheral genes may be gained or lost, 

while core genes tend to be more resistant to evolutionary change.  

Applying the pan-genome concept, it should be possible, in principle, to determine the degree 

of similarity between different bacterial species or strains by identifying genome-level 

patterns to find conserved genome fragments, the proportion of individual genomes which 

they occupy, and their correlation with environmental factors. Pattern recognition of this type 

has long been a subject of research [6], and is increasingly being applied to biological 

problems [7]. However, many pattern recognition techniques are computationally expensive, 

and the computational effort increases exponentially with the dimensionality of the datasets. 

 

1.1 

Sliding Window Approaches to Sequence Analysis 

Biological sequences, whether DNA, RNA or amino acid are frequently analysed one letter at 

a time. However, more genetic context may be gained by analysis at the level of tokens: n-

mers of bases or amino acids. For a token of length five there are 1024 possible tokens from a 

DNA sequence, but 3,200,000 in an amino acid sequence. The analytical space of an amino 

acid sequence is therefore far richer and more complex than that of a DNA sequence. 

A genome can be converted into a set of tokens using a sliding window of length n over the 

sequence. The window is positioned at the start of the sequence, and the first n letters 

(positions 0 to n-1) recorded as a token. The window is then moved forward by one letter, 

and the next token (positions 1 to n) recorded. In this way the entire genome sequence can be 

converted into a set of overlapping tokens. Ignoring position information, the entire set of 

tokens may be treated as a bag of words (BOW), following approaches previously used in 

text mining [8]. Each genome can be represented using a vector space model, in which each 

vector is a token, and each token has a weight, representing the number of times it occurred 

in that genome. 


Vector spaces may be very high dimensional. For example, 2,000 tokens may form 20002000 

different vectors. Bacterial genomes may be dissected into over 2,000,000 tokens, making the 

associated vector space extremely large. Such spaces are subject to the “curse of 

dimensionality”. This evocative term was coined by Bellman [9], who obviously felt deeply 

about the topic, characterizing it as “a malediction that has plagued the scientist from earliest 

days”. Bellman was referring to the exponential growth in computational complexity that 

accompanies a linear growth in the number of dimensions to a problem. The meaning of the 

term has changed slightly over time; in current common statistical usage the term reflects the 

problems associated with the sparsity of data in multiple dimensions [10]. Sparse data spaces 

are difficult, and computationally expensive, to search. 

To overcome this problem, a range of techniques for dimensionality reduction have been 

developed. One such approach is known as latent-variable models [11]. In latent-variable 

models dimensionality reduction is achieved by representing a high-dimensional data by a 

few hidden or latent variables, which are not directly observed but inferred from the observed 

variables present in the model. In the latent-variable models we assume that a small number 

of hidden causes combine to give rise to the complexity of the data. Both the original data 

and the latent variables may be either continuous or discrete. 

When both types of variable—original and latent—are discrete, an appropriate method to 

apply is latent class analysis (LCA) [12]. LCA is a statistical method, which aims to find 

groups of related items (latent classes or components) from observed multivariate data. Each 

latent variable represents a class that is characterised by a conditional probability distribution 

describing the chance that each observed variable is in that class. LCA can be regarded as a 

form of cluster analysis, as it finds a small number of latent classes that explain the observed 

data. However, cluster analysis assigns each item to a single cluster, whereas, in LCA one 

item can be allocated to multiple groups, and is associated with corresponding conditional 

probabilities [13]. 

An example of a latent-class model is the latent topic model, widely used in information 

retrieval [14]. This algorithm discovers the abstract topics present in a collection of 

documents. The underlying assumption is that each document can be represented at a topic 

level instead of a word level. Each document is assigned to a each topic with a different 

weight, which reflects the extent of its membership of the topic, including the coordinates of 

that document in a reduced latent semantic space. Topic modelling in essence integrates soft 

clustering with dimension reduction [8]. 

One version of latent-class models is latent semantic analysis (LSA). The LSA algorithm was 

designed for the fast retrieval of information in documents. The goal of the LSA is to 

represent the semantic relationships between words and documents by projecting documents 

into a semantic space [13]. This projection permits the analysis of documents at a conceptual 

level. This transformation also helps in handling occurrences of polysemy—the existence of 

many possible meanings for a word or phrase—and synonyms, which are mapped to similar 

locations in the semantic space.  


The algorithm is based on the construction of a co-occurrence matrix for the vectors. A 

singular value decomposition (SVD) of the co-occurrence data is then performed, factorising 

the co-occurrence matrix into a product of matrices (Eqn 1).  

t

V

U

N





 

(1) 

where U and V are matrices with orthonormal columns and Σ is a diagonal matrix. 

Data dimensionality is then reduced by mapping BOW vectors, which are restricted to be 

linear in the lower dimensional representation, onto a latent semantic space. A latent sematic 

space is a mathematical representation of a large body of text, in which every term, every 

text, and every novel combination of terms has a high dimensional vector representation.  

LSA has been used to analyse genomic patterns in E. coli and P. marinus. Each token was a 

short nucleotide fragment. It was found that E. coli genomes rarely share identical 

components. In contrast, in  P. marinus most of the tokens are shared between strains. Based 

on the functional analysis of each gene region present in different components, it was 

concluded that the LSA analysis is capable of characterizing a set of core and dispensable 

genes in these two bacteria [15]. 

Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (PLSA) is an extension of LSA [13]. PLSA is based 

on a mixture decomposition derived from a latent class model. The main objective of the 

algorithm, as in LSA, is to represent high-dimensional co-occurrence information in a lower-

dimensional way in order to discover the hidden semantic structure of the data using a 

probabilistic framework. The algorithm relates a set of observed multivariate data (words and 

documents) to a set of latent variables (represented by topics or components). The 

introduction of latent variables acts as a bottleneck and results in dimensionality reduction 

(Figure 1). 

The second representation of the PLSA algorithm is related to a matrix decomposition. So the 

algorithm can be viewed as a factorisation of the sparse co-occurrence matrix with the aim to 

reduce its dimensionality. This can be achieved by approximation of a co-occurrence matrix 

into a product of low-rank matrices: 

t

V

U

A





 

(2) 

Where U is the conditional probability of a document given a component P(d/z). Σ is the 

diagonal matrix of the prior probabilities of the topics, P(z), and V is P(w/z). PLSA is 

sometimes compared to a Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). It has been shown that 

PLSA is a NMF with Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [16]. These authors state that any 

local maximum likelihood solution of PLSA is a solution of a NMF with KL divergence. 

 


 

Figure 1. 

Schematic representation of PLSA general structure. It shows the latent topics that links 

documents and words into common topics with the associated probabilities. Source: [13]. 

PLSA has been applied to a range of problems, including text indexing, retrieval and 

clustering [17-19]; image analysis [20-22]; and the analysis of mass spectroscopy data [23]. 

In the field of bioinformatics, PLSA has been applied to problems such as the  prediction of 

protein subcellular localization [24] and the joint analysis of multiple metagenomic samples 

[25]. The latter study aimed to find hidden components shared across metagenomic datasets, 

in order to infer associations between microbial sequences and phenotypes. The tokens used 

in this study were of length 4. Some interesting, significant correlations were found between 

phenotypes and the distribution of phenotypes. 

1.2 

Staphylococcus aureus as a Pathogen 

Staphylococcus aureus is a common human commensal, with up to 30% of people carrying 

the bacterium  in their nasal passages [26]. It is usually harmless, but when it moves into sites 

such as the lungs or bloodstream it can cause a range of pathologies.  S. aureus  is the most 

frequently occurring bacterium in clinical isolates from hospital inpatients [27]. Many strains 

are resistant to widely-used drugs, and the steady rise in the incidence of S. aureus 

bacteraemia due to the increased frequency of invasive procedures, increased numbers of 

immunocompromised patients, and increased resistance of S. aureus strains to available 

antibiotics, including methicillin, [27] has caused widespread concern. S. aureus infection 

can lead to a wide range of pathologies, including: skin infections (eg, folliculitis, furuncles, 

impetigo, wound infections, scalded skin syndrome); soft-tissue infections (eg, pyomyositis, 

septic bursitis, septic arthritis); toxic shock syndrome; purpura fulminans; endocarditis; 

osteomyelitis; pneumonia; food poisoning; infections related to prosthetic devices (eg, 

prosthetic joints and heart valves; vascular shunts, grafts, catheters); and urinary tract 

infection. The development of algorithms to identify the potential clinical phenotype of the 

bacteria from their genome sequence would facilitate rapid diagnosis and guide treatment 

decisions. 

We applied the PLSA approach to S. aureus, using tokens derived from amino acid sequences 

rather than DNA. We characterised genome-scale amino acid sequences in terms of their 

components, and then investigated the relationships between genomes and tokens and the 

phenotypes they generated. As a control we used the non-pathogenic model Gram-positive 

bacterium B. subtilis. 




2 

Methods 

2.1 

Dataset 

Perhaps the most clinically important phenotypic trait in S. aureus is resistance to the 

antibiotic methicillin, which is often used when other antibiotics fail. Methicillin resistant S. 

aureus (MRSA) carry a gene called mecA, which also confers resistance to penicillin and 

related antibiotics [28]. Ten S. aureus strains were downloaded from GenBank1. Five of the 

genomes are known to contain mecA, and five do not (Table 1). 

Table 1. 

Bacterial strains used in the analysis. 

Strain 

mecA status 

S. aureus N315 

+ 

S. aureus Mu50 

+ 

S. aureus MW2 

+ 

S. aureus COL 

+ 

S. aureus TW20 

+ 

S. aureus Newman 

- 

S. aureus VC40 

- 

S. aureus JH1 

- 

S. aureus RF122 

- 

S. aureus NCTC 8325 

- 

 

2.2  

Model Construction 

Each genome was read and translated into all six reading frames. Each genome was then 

converted into a set of tokens of length five, using the sliding window approach described 

above. This window length was selected because the size of the possible search space 

increases exponentially with window length, making computational analysis prohibitively 

lengthy. A token length of five is the smallest at which “forbidden penta-peptides”, which are 

known to be absent in the proteome, can appear in the analysis [29]. 

In the latent class model, genomes can be represented as a collection of samples D = d1, 

d2,…,dn with tokens from a vocabulary W = w1, w2..., wn. Ignoring the sequence order in 

which tokens occur in samples, we can represent the data as a N*M sample token co-

occurrence matrix M, where the element Mij indicates the number of occurrences of a 

particular token wj in a sample di . This representation of samples is called a vector-space 

model, where each column of a matrix M represents a vector of a particular sample (Figure 

2). 

Formally, for a given value of n, the number of occurrences of all tokens is normalised across 

samples in order to derive sample-specific relative occurrences. We denote by xin the relative 

abundance of token n in sample i, and by yi the phenotype of sample i. 

We used a nonparametric Mann-Whitney test to compare the relative abundance of each 

token in the different phenotypic groups. 

 

1 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ 


 

Figure 2. 

Representation of a co-occurrence matrix M, each column represents a vector of a 

particular sample and each row represents a vector of a particular token. 

2.2.1 Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis 

The PLSA algorithm is based on a statistical model, called the aspect model [13]. The aspect 

model is a latent variable model for co-occurrence data, such as documents and terms, that 

associates an unobserved class variable or component zk, where k is the number of 

components in each observation, where an observation is occurrence of a particular token. 

The aspect model has two forms, namely symmetric and asymmetric forms. We use the 

symmetric form, as it models samples and tokens in a symmetric manner (Figure 3). 

 

Figure 3. 

Graphical representation of the aspect model in a symmetric form. D represents 

samples, W tokens and Z components. 

The algorithm uses the following probabilities: P(zk) is the probability that a token will be 

observed in a particular component; P(wj | zk) is the class-conditional probability of a certain 

token conditioned on the unobserved component z; and P(di | zk) is the conditional probability 

of a particular sample given the distribution of components, giving a component-specific 

probability distribution over the samples. 

 PLSA is therefore a generative model with the following steps: 

 Select a component z with probability P(z) 

 Choose a sample d with probability P(d | z) 

 Generate a token w with probability P(w | z) 

The resulting outcome is an observation pair (d,w), which can be considered to be a joint 

probability P(d | w) between a token and a sample: 





  

 









K

k

k

j

k

i

k

j

i

z

w

P

z

d

P

z

P

w

d

P

1

|

|

,

 

(3) 

The algorithm was applied to the ten S. aureus genomes listed in Table 1. 






3 

Results 

The ten S. aureus genomes were used to generate tokens, as described above. A total of 

2,035,253 million unique tokens were identified (Table 2), of which 12,319 tokens are 

different between methicillin resistant and methicillin susceptible phenotypic groups. 

Table 2. 

List of mecA gene tokens present and absent in S. aureus strains. A total number of 

tokens of length 5 is specified for each strain. 

Strain 

Reference 

mecA status 

Number of tokens 

N315 

[30] 

+ 

1,730,352 

Mu50 

[31] 

+ 

1,752,841 

MW2 

[32] 

+ 

1,737,534 

COL 

[33] 

+ 

1,732,918 

TW20 

 

+ 

1,788,387 

Newman 

[34] 

- 

1,739,876 

VC40 

[35] 

- 

1,704,891 

JH1 

[36] 

- 

1,556,066 

RF122 

 

- 

1,718,817 

NCTC 8325 

[37] 

- 

1,740,199 

 

The distribution of tokens for strain N315 is shown in Figure 4. 

 

Figure 4. 

Distribution of token occurrences in S. aureus strain N315. All strains had a similar 

token distribution. 

Of the 2,035,253 unique tokens identified, 12,319 were found to be unique to one of the two 

phenotypic groups: methicillin resistant or non-resistant (Mann-Whitney U test, p &lt; 0.05). 

Although some of these tokens will undoubtedly be derived from the mecA gene, which we 

know to be present in the resistant group and absent in the sensitive group, it is highly likely 

that there are other systematic differences between the two groups, of which we know little or 

nothing. From a practical point of view, we are interested in tokens which are highly 

correlated with the phenotype. We therefore assume that there exists a group of common 

bacterial components and that each bacterium is a mixture of these components. In order to 

identify the components a PLSA model was derived, using an Expectation-Maximisation 




(EM) algorithm. The EM algorithm converges to a local maximum of its fitness value, and 

must therefore be run multiple times from random starting points in order to more fully 

explore the solution space. Three components were identified (Figure 5). 

 

 

Figure 5. 

P(z) matrix generated by the PLSA algorithm for the ten S. aureus strains. 

The distribution of tokens was not statistically significantly different across the three 

components, indicating that, as expected, presence or absence of mecA is not the only 

difference between the resistant and sensitive strains (Table 3).  

Table 3. 

The five most highly-ranked tokens in each component. 

Component 1 

Component 2 

Component 3 

Token  

P(w/z1) 

Token 

P(w/z2) 

Token 

P(w/z3) 

SDSDS 

6.14E-5 

SDSDS 

8.23E-5 

SDSDS 

8.08E-5 

DSDSD 

5.63E-5 

DSDSD 

8.06E-5 

DSDSD 

7.47E-5 

LLLLL 

5.47E-5 

LLLLL 

6.21E-5 

LLLLL 

3.47E-5 

LILLL 

2.93E-5 

SESLS 

3.19E-5 

LFLLL 

3.15E-5 

 

However, differences between strains were apparent: it appears that strains N315, Mu50 and 

JH1 are more closely related to each other than to the rest of the strains. In addition, strain 

RF122 has a very different token distribution from the other strains (Figure 6). 

Of the 2,035,253 obtained, only 9,613 are significant at the 5% level, compared with 12,319 

identified as significant using the co-occurrence approach. It appears, then, that 2,706 of the 

tokens are false positives, and not related to the methicillin resistance phenotype. 

The algorithm was then applied to the comparison of tokens derived from the methicillin-

resistant S. aureus strains with those from five strains of B. subtilis: 168; 6051 HGW; BSn5; 

QB928 and XF 1. Regression analysis indicates that the distributions of tokens in components 

2 and 3 are significantly different at the 5% level (Figure 7), so that our approach can 

effectively distinguish between MRSA and B. subtilis. 

 




 

Figure 6. 

Distribution of tokens in a) Component 1, b) Component 2, and c) Component 3. The 

first five strains are methicillin resistant, and the remainder are sensitive. 

 

 

Figure 7. 

Distribution of tokens from MRSA and B. subtilis strains in a) Component 2 and b) 

Component 3. Strains N315, Mu50, MW2, COL and TW20 are MRSA strains, while the 

remainder are B. subtilis. 

 

3 

Discussion 

The rapid identification of bacterial pathogens, and their antibiotic resistance status, is 

important in order to treat patents effectively, and to reduce the use of ineffective drugs. 

Although the mechanism of drug resistance in bacteria has been an active area of research for 

many decades, our understanding of the genes and proteins involved in the thousands of 





b) 

a) 

c) 


bacteria responding to hundreds of antibiotics is incomplete. The information that we do have 

is largely contained in the literature, couched in abstruse technical jargon, and not easily 

available for computational analysis. 

An increasingly attractive alternative approach is to use the rapidly-growing body of genome 

data being generated by recently-developed high throughput Next Generation Sequencing 

technologies. Although much of this data lacks annotation, it is directly linked to clinical 

phenotype, and then can be used in a “black box” manner, with important differences learned 

by computational algorithms. Once trained, such algorithms can be used to rapidly identify 

organisms and their drug resistance status. The differences identified can also be used to 

direct further laboratory investigations, by generating testable hypotheses about the areas of 

the genome which differ between resistant and sensitive strains. 

We applied an algorithm developed for the analysis of large text corpuses, latent sematic 

indexing, to the analysis of differences between the genomes of methicillin resistant and 

methicillin sensitive S. aureus. Rather than apply the algorithm directly to the DNA 

sequence, with its limited four-letter alphabet, be computationally translated the genomes in 

all six reading frames, producing a much larger search space from the 20-letter amino acid 

alphabet. Using a sliding window approach we generated all possible tokens of length n from 

each genome. 

The PLSA algorithm generated three components. Although there were visible differences 

between the distributions of tokens in the components according to methicillin resistance 

status, these differences are not statistically significant. This finding is not entirely surprising, 

since we based our phenotypic groupings on the presence or absence of a single gene, mecA, 

known to be important in methicillin resistance. Although mecA is a major player, there are 

undoubtedly many other factors affecting methicillin resistance, including other genes, 

environmental factors, and possibly issues such as post-translational modifications to amino 

acid strings.  Application of PLSA approach to tokens derived from a different bacterial 

species, B. subtilis, did identify significant differences, indicating that the approach is valid, 

given the appropriate identification of indicators for the clinical phenotype. The information 

already present in the literature could be used to further refine this identification. Existing 

information could also be integrated into the analysis by incorporating annotations from a 

database such as the Gene Ontology [38], based upon the chromosomal location of a token. 

The amount of genome sequence data available in public databases is very large and 

increasing exponentially. Although data is deposited faster than it can be annotated, it can 

still be used for applications including clinical assessment, using approaches such as latent 

semantic analysis. 

 

 

 


References 

[1] 

B. Spellberg, R. Guidos, D. Gilbert, J. Bradley, H. W. Boucher, W. M. Scheld, et al., "The 

epidemic of antibiotic-resistant infections: a call to action for the medical community from 

the Infectious Diseases Society of America," Clinical Infectious Diseases, vol. 46, pp. 155-

164, 2008. 

[2] 

L. Poirel, R. A. Bonnin, and P. Nordmann, "Analysis of the resistome of a multidrug-resistant 

NDM-1-producing Escherichia coli strain by high-throughput genome sequencing," 

Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, vol. 55, pp. 4224-4229, 2011. 

[3] 

M. D. Adams, E. R. Chan, N. D. Molyneaux, and R. A. Bonomo, "Genomewide analysis of 

divergence of antibiotic resistance determinants in closely related isolates of Acinetobacter 

baumannii," Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, vol. 54, pp. 3569-3577, 2010. 

[4] 

D. Medini, C. Donati, H. Tettelin, V. Masignani, and R. Rappuoli, "The microbial pan-

genome," Current Opinion in Genetics &amp; Development, vol. 15, pp. 589 - 594, 2005. 

[5] 

A. M. Lesk, Introduction to Bioinformatics. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 

[6] 

C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning: Springer, 2007. 

[7] 

S. Sauer and M. Kliem, "Mass spectrometry tools for the classification and identification of 

bacteria," Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 8, pp. 74-82, 2010. 

[8] 

Crain, S., K. Zhou, S.-H. Yang, and H. Zha, "Dimensionality reduction and topic modelling: 

From latent semantic indexing to latent Dirichlet allocation and beyond," in Mining Text 

Data, C. C. Aggarwal and C. Zhai, Eds., ed: Springer US, 2012, pp. 129 - 161. 

[9] 

R. E. Bellman, Adaptive Control Processes: A Guided Tour. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 

University Press, 1961. 

[10] 

D. W. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice and Visualization. New 

York.: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc,, 1992. 

[11] 

M. A. Carreira-Perpinan, " A review of dimension reduction techniques.," University of 

Sheffield, Department of Computer Science1997. 

[12] 

P. F. Lazarsfeld and N. W. Henry, Latent structure analysis. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,, 

1968. 

[13] 

T. Hofmann, " Probabilistic latent semantic analysis," presented at the 22nd annual 

international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, 

1999. 

[14] 

M. Steyvers and T. Griffiths, "Probabilistic topic models," in Handbook of Latent Semantic 

Analysis, ed: Psychology Press, 2007. 

[15] 

T. Y. Lim, X. Hu, C. Xin, S. Xiajiong, E. K. Park, and G. L. Rosen, "Exploiting the 

functional and taxonomic structure of genomic data by probabilistic topic modeling," 

IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 9, pp. 980 - 991, 

2012. 

[16] 

E. Gaussier and C. Goutte, "Relation between plsa and nmf and implications," presented at 

the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 

Information Retrieval, Salvador, Brazil. , 2005. 

[17] 

D. Cohn and H. Chang, "Learning to probabilistically identify authoritative documents," in 

17th International Conference on Machine Learning, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 

USA, 2000, pp. 167 - 174. 

[18] 

D. Cohn and T. Hofmann, "The missing link - a probabilistic model of document content and 

hypertext connectivity," in NIPS ’00: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 

2000. 

[19] 

T. Brants, F. Chen, and I. Tsochantaridis, "Topic-based document segmentation with 

probabilistic latent semantic analysis," presented at the Eleventh International Conference on 

Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’02,, New York, NY, 2002. 

[20] 

J. Sivic, B. C. Russell, A. A. Efros, A. Zisserman, and W. T. Freeman, "Discovering objects 

and their location in images," pp. 370 - 377, 2005. 


[21] 

F. Monay and D. Gatica-Perez, "Plsa-based image auto-annotation: Constraining the latent 

space," presented at the 12th Annual ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 

Multimedia ’04, New York, NY, 2004. 

[22] 

J. Li, Gong, S. and T. Xiang, "Global behaviour inference using probabilistic latent semantic 

analysis," presented at the British Machine Vision Conference, 2008. 

[23] 

M. Hanselmann, M. Kirchner, B. Y. Renard, E. R. Amstalden, K. Glunde, R. M. A. Heeren, 

et al., "Concise representation of mass spectrometry images by probabilistic latent semantic 

analysis," Analytical Chemistry, vol. 80, pp. 9649 - 9658, 2008. 

[24] 

J.-M. Chang, E. Chia-Yu Su, A. Lo, H.-S. Chiu, T.-Y. Sung, and W.-L. Hsu, "Psldoc: Protein 

subcellular localization prediction based on gapped dipeptides and probabilistic latent 

semantic analysis," Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, vol. 72, p. 693710, 

2008. 

[25] 

Y. Baran and E. Halperin, " Joint analysis of multiple metagenomic samples," PLoS 

Computational Biology, vol. 8, 2012. 

[26] 

C. D. den Heijer, E. M. van Bejnen, W. J. Paget, M. Pringle, H. Goossens, C. A. Bruggeman, 

et al., "Prevalence and resistance of commensal Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin-

resistant S. aureus, in nine European countries: A cross-sectional study," Lancet Infectious 

Diseases, vol. 13, p. 1011, 2013. 

[27] 

C. K. Naber, "Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, and 

management strategies," Clinical Infectious Diseases, vol. 48, pp. S231-S237, May 15, 2009 

2009. 

[28] 

K. Ubukata, R. Nonoguchi, M. Matsuhashi, and M. Konno, "Expression and inducibility in 

Staphylococcus aureus of the meca gene, which encodes a methicillin resistant S. aureus-

specific penicillin-binding protein," Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 171, pp. 2882 - 2885, 1989. 

[29] 

T. Tuller, B. Chor, and N. Nelson, " Forbidden penta-peptides," Protein Science, vol. 16, pp. 

2251 - 2259, 2007. 

[30] 

T. Ito, Y. Katayama, and K. Hiramatsu, "Cloning and nucleotide sequence determination of 

the entire mec DNA of pre-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus N315," Antimicrobial 

Agents and Chemotherapy, vol. 43, pp. 1449-1458, 1999. 

[31] 

K. Hiramatsu, L. Cui, M. Kuroda, and T. Ito, "The emergence and evolution of methicillin-

resistant Staphylococcus aureus," Trends in Microbiology, vol. 9, pp. 486-493, 2001. 

[32] 

L.-c. C. WU, "DNA sequences and primers for identifying methicillin-resistent 

Staphylococcus aureus MW2 and USA300 strains," 2010. 

[33] 

S. Ravipaty and J. P. Reilly, "Comprehensive characterization of methicillin-resistant 

Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus COL secretome by two-dimensional liquid 

chromatography and mass spectrometry," Molecular &amp; Cellular Proteomics, vol. 9, pp. 1898-

1919, 2010. 

[34] 

T. Baba, T. Bae, O. Schneewind, F. Takeuchi, and K. Hiramatsu, "Genome sequence of 

Staphylococcus aureus strain Newman and comparative analysis of staphylococcal genomes: 

polymorphism and evolution of two major pathogenicity islands," Journal of Bacteriology, 

vol. 190, pp. 300-310, 2008. 

[35] 

R. Rosenstein and F. Götz, "What distinguishes highly pathogenic staphylococci from 

medium-and non-pathogenic?," in Between Pathogenicity and Commensalism, ed: Springer, 

2013, pp. 33-89. 

[36] 

S. Matyi, J. Dupre, W. Johnson, P. Hoyt, D. White, T. Brody, et al., "Isolation and 

characterization of Staphylococcus aureus strains from a Paso del Norte dairy," Journal of 

Dairy Science, vol. 96, pp. 3535-3542, 2013. 

[37] 

J. Štěpán, R. Pantůček, V. Růžičková, S. Rosypal, V. Hájek, and J. Doškař, "Identification of 

Staphylococcus aureus based on PCR amplification of species specific genomic 826 bp 

sequence derived from a common 44-kb Sma I restriction fragment," Molecular and Cellular 

Probes, vol. 15, pp. 249-257, 2001. 

[38] 

M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, J. M. Cherry, et al., "Gene 

Ontology: Tool for the unification of biology," Nature Genetics, vol. 25, pp. 25 - 29, 2000. 

 

