
← Previous Next →

ONE THOUGHT ON “

ONE THOUGHT ON “HOW RELEVANCE MODELS WORK

HOW RELEVANCE MODELS WORK””

How relevance models work

Posted on December 4, 2013 by Martin Johansson

A relevance model is what a search engine uses to rank documents in a search result, i.e. how it finds the document you

are looking for. An axiomatic analysis of relevance models is asking the questions: how and why does a relevance model

work? Findwise attended the ICTIR 2013 conference in Copenhagen where one of the recurring topics was the axiomatic

analysis of relevance models.

The relevance model is represented through a mathematical function of a set of input variables, and therefore just by

looking at its formula it is likely to be very difficult to answer those two questions. What the axiomatic analysis aims to

do is to break down the formulas and to isolate and analyze each of its individual components, with the goal of making

improvements in the performance.

The idea is to formulate a set of axioms, meaning laws that a relevance model should abide by. One of the more obvious

axioms, from a purely statistical point of view, relates to term frequency (TF): a document d , where the terms of the

query occur more times than in some other document d , is to be assigned a higher relevance than d . These are called

axioms because they should be relevance truths – statements that are obvious and that everyone can agree on. Other

examples of axioms could be that very long documents should be penalized simply because they have a higher

probability to contain any word, and that terms frequent in many documents should contribute less to the relevance than

terms that are more unique.

From an Enterprise Search perspective, these axioms do not have to be general relevance truths, but more adapted to your

organization and your users. Here we see a shift in the type of axioms from pure statistics-based towards more metadata-

based, e.g. which fields are more relevant than others and which sources are more relevant. A very simple example of

this is that a hit in the title is more relevant than a hit in the body. These are usually conveniently configurable in most

search engines, e.g. Apache Solr.

This concept is useful and interesting for many reasons since it not only allows you to modify and improve existing

relevance models but you can also create new ones from scratch. This process can also be automated using Machine

Learning algorithms, which leaves us with the task of finding the optimal set of axioms. Can you think of axioms that can

be applied to your organization, your users informational needs and the content that is made searchable?

This entry was posted in Enterprise Search by Martin Johansson. Bookmark the permalink.

1

2

2







KUMAR on August 30, 2016 at 20:20 said:

Hi Martin,

Above article is very informative , and i would also like to know more on this, i mean what are the check points are

following and how it works internally.







The Findability blog

The Findability blog

the enterprise search and findability blog by Findwise

the enterprise search and findability blog by Findwise

Home

About

Findwise.com


Proudly powered by WordPress



Reply ↓



Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 











Post Comment

Post Comment



Comment



Name

*



Email

*



Website

