
Information retrieval

Toggle the table of contents



 38

languages

Article

Talk

Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Information science

General aspects

Access · Architecture · Behavior · Management · Retrieval · Seeking · Society · Knowledge organization · Ontology · Philosophy · Science and technology studies · Taxonomy

Related fields and subfields

Bibliometrics · Categorization · Censorship · Classification · Computer data storage · Cultural studies · Data modeling · Informatics · Information technology · Intellectual freedom · Intellectual property · Library and information science · Memory ·

Preservation · Privacy · Quantum information science

v · t · e

Information retrieval (IR) in computing and information science is the process of obtaining information system resources that are relevant to an information need from a collection of those resources. Searches can be

based on full-text or other content-based indexing. Information retrieval is the science[1] of searching for information in a document, searching for documents themselves, and also searching for the metadata that describes

data, and for databases of texts, images or sounds.

Automated information retrieval systems are used to reduce what has been called information overload. An IR system is a software system that provides access to books, journals and other documents; stores and

manages those documents. Web search engines are the most visible IR applications.

Overview [edit]

An information retrieval process begins when a user or searcher enters a query into the system. Queries are formal statements of information needs, for example search strings in web search engines. In information

retrieval a query does not uniquely identify a single object in the collection. Instead, several objects may match the query, perhaps with different degrees of relevance.

An object is an entity that is represented by information in a content collection or database. User queries are matched against the database information. However, as opposed to classical SQL queries of a database, in

information retrieval the results returned may or may not match the query, so results are typically ranked. This ranking of results is a key difference of information retrieval searching compared to database searching.[2]

Depending on the application the data objects may be, for example, text documents, images,[3] audio,[4] mind maps[5] or videos. Often the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the IR system, but are

instead represented in the system by document surrogates or metadata.

Most IR systems compute a numeric score on how well each object in the database matches the query, and rank the objects according to this value. The top ranking objects are then shown to the user. The process may

then be iterated if the user wishes to refine the query.[6]

History [edit]

there is ... a machine called the Univac ... whereby letters and figures are coded as a pattern of magnetic spots on a long steel tape. By this means the text of a document, preceded by its subject code

symbol, can be recorded ... the machine ... automatically selects and types out those references which have been coded in any desired way at a rate of 120 words a minute

— J. E. Holmstrom, 1948

The idea of using computers to search for relevant pieces of information was popularized in the article As We May Think by Vannevar Bush in 1945.[7] It would appear that Bush was inspired by patents for a 'statistical

machine' - filed by Emanuel Goldberg in the 1920s and '30s - that searched for documents stored on film.[8] The first description of a computer searching for information was described by Holmstrom in 1948,[9] detailing an

early mention of the Univac computer. Automated information retrieval systems were introduced in the 1950s: one even featured in the 1957 romantic comedy, Desk Set. In the 1960s, the first large information retrieval

research group was formed by Gerard Salton at Cornell. By the 1970s several different retrieval techniques had been shown to perform well on small text corpora such as the Cranfield collection (several thousand

documents).[7] Large-scale retrieval systems, such as the Lockheed Dialog system, came into use early in the 1970s.

In 1992, the US Department of Defense along with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), cosponsored the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) as part of the TIPSTER text program. The aim of this was

to look into the information retrieval community by supplying the infrastructure that was needed for evaluation of text retrieval methodologies on a very large text collection. This catalyzed research on methods that scale to

huge corpora. The introduction of web search engines has boosted the need for very large scale retrieval systems even further.

Applications [edit]

Areas where information retrieval techniques are employed include (the entries are in alphabetical order within each category):

General applications [edit]

Digital libraries

Information filtering

Recommender systems

Media search

Blog search

Image retrieval

3D retrieval

Music retrieval

News search

Speech retrieval

Video retrieval

Search engines

Site search

Desktop search

Enterprise search

Federated search

Mobile search

Social search

Web search

Domain-specific applications [edit]

Expert search finding

Genomic information retrieval

Geographic information retrieval

Information retrieval for chemical structures

Information retrieval in software engineering

Legal information retrieval

Vertical search

Other retrieval methods [edit]

Methods/Techniques in which information retrieval techniques are employed include:

Adversarial information retrieval

Automatic summarization

Multi-document summarization










Categorization of IR-models (translated from German entry, original source Dominik

Kuropka ).

Compound term processing

Cross-lingual retrieval

Document classification

Spam filtering

Question answering

Model types [edit]

For effectively retrieving relevant documents by IR strategies, the documents are typically transformed into a suitable representation.

Each retrieval strategy incorporates a specific model for its document representation purposes. The picture on the right illustrates the

relationship of some common models. In the picture, the models are categorized according to two dimensions: the mathematical basis

and the properties of the model.

First dimension: mathematical basis [edit]

Set-theoretic models represent documents as sets of words or phrases. Similarities are usually derived from set-theoretic operations

on those sets. Common models are:

Standard Boolean model

Extended Boolean model

Fuzzy retrieval

Algebraic models represent documents and queries usually as vectors, matrices, or tuples. The similarity of the query vector and

document vector is represented as a scalar value.

Vector space model

Generalized vector space model

(Enhanced) Topic-based Vector Space Model

Extended Boolean model

Latent semantic indexing a.k.a. latent semantic analysis

Probabilistic models treat the process of document retrieval as a probabilistic inference. Similarities are computed as probabilities that a document is relevant for a given query. Probabilistic theorems like the Bayes'

theorem are often used in these models.

Binary Independence Model

Probabilistic relevance model on which is based the okapi (BM25) relevance function

Uncertain inference

Language models

Divergence-from-randomness model

Latent Dirichlet allocation

Feature-based retrieval models view documents as vectors of values of feature functions (or just features) and seek the best way to combine these features into a single relevance score, typically by learning to rank

methods. Feature functions are arbitrary functions of document and query, and as such can easily incorporate almost any other retrieval model as just another feature.

Second dimension: properties of the model [edit]

Models without term-interdependencies treat different terms/words as independent. This fact is usually represented in vector space models by the orthogonality assumption of term vectors or in probabilistic models by

an independency assumption for term variables.

Models with immanent term interdependencies allow a representation of interdependencies between terms. However the degree of the interdependency between two terms is defined by the model itself. It is usually

directly or indirectly derived (e.g. by dimensional reduction) from the co-occurrence of those terms in the whole set of documents.

Models with transcendent term interdependencies allow a representation of interdependencies between terms, but they do not allege how the interdependency between two terms is defined. They rely an external

source for the degree of interdependency between two terms. (For example, a human or sophisticated algorithms.)

Performance and correctness measures [edit]

Main article: Evaluation measures (information retrieval)

The evaluation of an information retrieval system' is the process of assessing how well a system meets the information needs of its users. In general, measurement considers a collection of documents to be searched and

a search query. Traditional evaluation metrics, designed for Boolean retrieval[clarification needed] or top-k retrieval, include precision and recall. All measures assume a ground truth notion of relevance: every document is

known to be either relevant or non-relevant to a particular query. In practice, queries may be ill-posed and there may be different shades of relevance.

Timeline [edit]

Before the 1900s

1801: Joseph Marie Jacquard invents the Jacquard loom, the first machine to use punched cards to control a sequence of operations.

1880s: Herman Hollerith invents an electro-mechanical data tabulator using punch cards as a machine readable medium.

1890 Hollerith cards, keypunches and tabulators used to process the 1890 US Census data.

1920s-1930s

Emanuel Goldberg submits patents for his "Statistical Machine” a document search engine that used photoelectric cells and pattern recognition to search the metadata on rolls of microfilmed documents.

1940s–1950s

late 1940s: The US military confronted problems of indexing and retrieval of wartime scientific research documents captured from Germans.

1945: Vannevar Bush's As We May Think appeared in Atlantic Monthly.

1947: Hans Peter Luhn (research engineer at IBM since 1941) began work on a mechanized punch card-based system for searching chemical compounds.

1950s: Growing concern in the US for a "science gap" with the USSR motivated, encouraged funding and provided a backdrop for mechanized literature searching systems (Allen Kent et al.) and the invention of the

citation index by Eugene Garfield.

1950: The term "information retrieval" was coined by Calvin Mooers.[10]

1951: Philip Bagley conducted the earliest experiment in computerized document retrieval in a master thesis at MIT.[11]

1955: Allen Kent joined Case Western Reserve University, and eventually became associate director of the Center for Documentation and Communications Research. That same year, Kent and colleagues

published a paper in American Documentation describing the precision and recall measures as well as detailing a proposed "framework" for evaluating an IR system which included statistical sampling methods for

determining the number of relevant documents not retrieved.[12]

1958: International Conference on Scientific Information Washington DC included consideration of IR systems as a solution to problems identified. See: Proceedings of the International Conference on Scientific

Information, 1958 (National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, 1959)

1959: Hans Peter Luhn published "Auto-encoding of documents for information retrieval."

1960s:

early 1960s: Gerard Salton began work on IR at Harvard, later moved to Cornell.

1960: Melvin Earl Maron and John Lary Kuhns[13] published "On relevance, probabilistic indexing, and information retrieval" in the Journal of the ACM 7(3):216–244, July 1960.

1962:

Cyril W. Cleverdon published early findings of the Cranfield studies, developing a model for IR system evaluation. See: Cyril W. Cleverdon, "Report on the Testing and Analysis of an Investigation into the

Comparative Efficiency of Indexing Systems". Cranfield Collection of Aeronautics, Cranfield, England, 1962.

Kent published Information Analysis and Retrieval.

1963:

Weinberg report "Science, Government and Information" gave a full articulation of the idea of a "crisis of scientific information." The report was named after Dr. Alvin Weinberg.

Joseph Becker and Robert M. Hayes published text on information retrieval. Becker, Joseph; Hayes, Robert Mayo. Information storage and retrieval: tools, elements, theories. New York, Wiley (1963).

1964:

Karen Spärck Jones finished her thesis at Cambridge, Synonymy and Semantic Classification, and continued work on computational linguistics as it applies to IR.

The National Bureau of Standards sponsored a symposium titled "Statistical Association Methods for Mechanized Documentation." Several highly significant papers, including G. Salton's first published reference

(we believe) to the SMART system.

mid-1960s:

National Library of Medicine developed MEDLARS Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System, the first major machine-readable database and batch-retrieval system.

Project Intrex at MIT.


1965: J. C. R. Licklider published Libraries of the Future.

1966: Don Swanson was involved in studies at University of Chicago on Requirements for Future Catalogs.

late 1960s: F. Wilfrid Lancaster completed evaluation studies of the MEDLARS system and published the first edition of his text on information retrieval.

1968:

Gerard Salton published Automatic Information Organization and Retrieval.

John W. Sammon, Jr.'s RADC Tech report "Some Mathematics of Information Storage and Retrieval..." outlined the vector model.

1969: Sammon's "



A nonlinear mapping for data structure analysis

 



Archived

 2017-08-08 at the Wayback Machine" (IEEE Transactions on Computers) was the first proposal for visualization interface to an

IR system.

1970s

early 1970s:

First online systems—NLM's AIM-TWX, MEDLINE; Lockheed's Dialog; SDC's ORBIT.

Theodor Nelson promoting concept of hypertext, published Computer Lib/Dream Machines.

1971: Nicholas Jardine and Cornelis J. van Rijsbergen published "The use of hierarchic clustering in information retrieval", which articulated the "cluster hypothesis."[14]

1975: Three highly influential publications by Salton fully articulated his vector processing framework and term discrimination model:

A Theory of Indexing (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics)

A Theory of Term Importance in Automatic Text Analysis (JASIS v. 26)

A Vector Space Model for Automatic Indexing (CACM 18:11)

1978: The First ACM SIGIR conference.

1979: C. J. van Rijsbergen published Information Retrieval (Butterworths). Heavy emphasis on probabilistic models.

1979: Tamas Doszkocs implemented the CITE natural language user interface for MEDLINE at the National Library of Medicine. The CITE system supported free form query input, ranked output and relevance

feedback.[15]

1980s

1980: First international ACM SIGIR conference, joint with British Computer Society IR group in Cambridge.

1982: Nicholas J. Belkin, Robert N. Oddy, and Helen M. Brooks proposed the ASK (Anomalous State of Knowledge) viewpoint for information retrieval. This was an important concept, though their automated

analysis tool proved ultimately disappointing.

1983: Salton (and Michael J. McGill) published Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval (McGraw-Hill), with heavy emphasis on vector models.

1985: David Blair and Bill Maron publish: An Evaluation of Retrieval Effectiveness for a Full-Text Document-Retrieval System

mid-1980s: Efforts to develop end-user versions of commercial IR systems.

1985–1993: Key papers on and experimental systems for visualization interfaces.

Work by Donald B. Crouch, Robert R. Korfhage, Matthew Chalmers, Anselm Spoerri and others.

1989: First World Wide Web proposals by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN.

1990s

1992: First TREC conference.

1997: Publication of Korfhage's Information Storage and Retrieval[16] with emphasis on visualization and multi-reference point systems.

1999: Publication of Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto's Modern Information Retrieval by Addison Wesley, the first book that attempts to cover all IR.

late 1990s: Web search engines implementation of many features formerly found only in experimental IR systems. Search engines become the most common and maybe best instantiation of IR models.

Major conferences [edit]

SIGIR: Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval

ECIR: European Conference on Information Retrieval

CIKM: Conference on Information and Knowledge Management

WWW: International World Wide Web Conference

WSDM: Conference on Web Search and Data Mining

ICTIR: International Conference on Theory of Information Retrieval

Awards in the field [edit]

Tony Kent Strix award

Gerard Salton Award

Karen Spärck Jones Award

See also [edit]

Adversarial information retrieval – Information retrieval strategies in datasets

Computer memory – Device used on a computer for storing data

Controlled vocabulary – Method of organizing knowledge

Cross-language information retrieval – Retrieval of Information in Different Languages.

Data mining – Process of extracting and discovering patterns in large data sets

European Summer School in Information Retrieval – ESSIR promotes research, innovation, and development of information access systems by educating junior and senior researchers, students, professionals, and

developers on the latest developments in the field, both methodological and technological.

Human–computer information retrieval (HCIR)

Information extraction – Machine reading of unstructured documents

Information seeking – Process or activity of attempting to obtain information in both human and technological contexts

Information seeking § Compared to information retrieval

Collaborative information seeking

Social information seeking – field of research that involves studying situations, motivations, and methods for people seeking and sharing information in participatory online social sites

Information Retrieval Facility – Organization in Vienna, Austria 2006–2012

Knowledge visualization – Set of techniques for creating images, diagrams, or animations to communicate a message

Multimedia information retrieval

Personal information management – Tools and systems for managing one's own data

Pearl growing – type of information retrieval

Query understanding – Search engine processing step

Relevance (information retrieval) – measure of a document's applicability to a given subject or search query

Relevance feedback – type of feedback

Rocchio classification

Search engine indexing – processing and storage of data to enable fast information querying

Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval – ACM Special Interest Group

Subject indexing

Temporal information retrieval

tf–idf – Number that reflects the importance of a word to a document in a corpus

XML retrieval

Web mining – Process of extracting and discovering patterns in large data sets

References [edit]

1. ^ Luk, R. W. P. (2022). "Why is information retrieval a scientific discipline?". Foundations of Science. 27 (2): 427–453. doi:10.1007/s10699-020-09685-x . S2CID 220506422 .

2. ^ Jansen, B. J. and Rieh, S. (2010) 



The Seventeen Theoretical Constructs of Information Searching and Information Retrieval

 



Archived

 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine. Journal of the American Society for Information

Sciences and Technology. 61(8), 1517-1534.

3. ^ Goodrum, Abby A. (2000). "Image Information Retrieval: An Overview of Current Research". Informing Science. 3 (2).

4. ^ Foote, Jonathan (1999). "An overview of audio information retrieval". Multimedia Systems. 7: 2–10. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.39.6339 . doi:10.1007/s005300050106 . S2CID 2000641 .

5. ^ Beel, Jöran; Gipp, Bela; Stiller, Jan-Olaf (2009). Information Retrieval On Mind Maps - What Could It Be Good For? . Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 28 February 2023, at 10:39 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a

non-profit organization.

5. ^ Beel, Jöran; Gipp, Bela; Stiller, Jan-Olaf (2009). Information Retrieval On Mind Maps - What Could It Be Good For? . Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and

Worksharing (CollaborateCom'09). Washington, DC: IEEE. Archived from the original  on 2011-05-13. Retrieved 2012-03-13.

6. ^ Frakes, William B.; Baeza-Yates, Ricardo (1992). Information Retrieval Data Structures &amp; Algorithms . Prentice-Hall, Inc. ISBN 978-0-13-463837-9. Archived from the original  on 2013-09-28.

7. ^ a b Singhal, Amit (2001). 



"Modern Information Retrieval: A Brief Overview"

 (PDF). Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering. 24 (4): 35–43.

8. ^ Mark Sanderson &amp; W. Bruce Croft (2012). "The History of Information Retrieval Research" . Proceedings of the IEEE. 100: 1444–1451. doi:10.1109/jproc.2012.2189916 .

9. ^ JE Holmstrom (1948). "'Section III. Opening Plenary Session" . The Royal Society Scientific Information Conference, 21 June-2 July 1948: Report and Papers Submitted: 85.

10. ^ Mooers, Calvin N.; The Theory of Digital Handling of Non-numerical Information and its Implications to Machine Economics  (Zator Technical Bulletin No. 48), cited in Fairthorne, R. A. (1958). "Automatic Retrieval of Recorded

Information" . The Computer Journal. 1 (1): 37. doi:10.1093/comjnl/1.1.36 .

11. ^ Doyle, Lauren; Becker, Joseph (1975). Information Retrieval and Processing. Melville. pp. 410 pp. ISBN 978-0-471-22151-7.

12. ^ Perry, James W.; Kent, Allen; Berry, Madeline M. (1955). "Machine literature searching X. Machine language; factors underlying its design and development". American Documentation. 6 (4): 242–254.

doi:10.1002/asi.5090060411 .

13. ^ Maron, Melvin E. (2008). 



"An Historical Note on the Origins of Probabilistic Indexing"

 (PDF). Information Processing and Management. 44 (2): 971–972. doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2007.02.012 .

14. ^ N. Jardine, C.J. van Rijsbergen (December 1971). "The use of hierarchic clustering in information retrieval". Information Storage and Retrieval. 7 (5): 217–240. doi:10.1016/0020-0271(71)90051-9 .

15. ^ Doszkocs, T.E. &amp; Rapp, B.A. (1979). "Searching MEDLINE in English: a Prototype User Interface with Natural Language Query, Ranked Output, and relevance feedback," In: Proceedings of the ASIS Annual Meeting, 16: 131-139.

Further reading [edit]

Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology behind Search (second edition)

 Archived

 2017-09-18 at the Wayback Machine. Addison-Wesley, UK,

2011.

Stefan Büttcher, Charles L. A. Clarke, and Gordon V. Cormack. Information Retrieval: Implementing and Evaluating Search Engines

 Archived

 2020-10-05 at the Wayback Machine. MIT Press, Cambridge,

Massachusetts, 2010.

"Information Retrieval System"

. Library &amp; Information Science Network. 24 April 2015.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information Retrieval

. Cambridge University Press, 2008.

External links [edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to Information retrieval.



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Information retrieval.

ACM SIGIR: Information Retrieval Special Interest Group

BCS IRSG: British Computer Society - Information Retrieval Specialist Group

Text Retrieval Conference (TREC)

Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (FIRE)

Information Retrieval

 (online book) by C. J. van Rijsbergen

Information Retrieval Wiki

 Archived

 2015-11-24 at the Wayback Machine

Information Retrieval Facility

 Archived

 2008-05-22 at the Wayback Machine

Information Retrieval @ DUTH



TREC report on information retrieval evaluation techniques

How eBay measures search relevance

Information retrieval performance evaluation tool @ Athena Research Centre

Authority control: National 



Spain  · France  · BnF data  · Germany  · Israel

 · United States

 · Japan  · Czech Republic

Categories: Information retrieval

Natural language processing



