
next up previous contents index 

Next: Multinomial distributions over words Up: Language models Previous: Finite automata and language Contents Index 

Types of language models

How do we build probabilities over sequences of terms? We can always use the chain rule from Equation 56 to decompose the probability of a

sequence of events into the probability of each successive event conditioned on earlier events: 



(94)

The simplest form of language model simply throws away all conditioning context, and estimates each term independently. Such a model is called a

unigram language model : 



(95)

There are many more complex kinds of language models, such as bigram language models , which condition on the previous term, 



(96)

and even more complex grammar-based language models such as probabilistic context-free grammars. Such models are vital for tasks like speech

recognition , spelling correction , and machine translation , where you need the probability of a term conditioned on surrounding context.

However, most language-modeling work in IR has used unigram language models. IR is not the place where you most immediately need complex

language models, since IR does not directly depend on the structure of sentences to the extent that other tasks like speech recognition do. Unigram

models are often sufficient to judge the topic of a text. Moreover, as we shall see, IR language models are frequently estimated from a single

document and so it is questionable whether there is enough training data to do more. Losses from data sparseness (see the discussion on page

13.2 ) tend to outweigh any gains from richer models. This is an example of the bias-variance tradeoff (cf. secbiasvariance): With limited training

data, a more constrained model tends to perform better. In addition, unigram models are more efficient to estimate and apply than higher-order

models. Nevertheless, the importance of phrase and proximity queries in IR in general suggests that future work should make use of more

sophisticated language models, and some has begun to lmir-refs. Indeed, making this move parallels the model of van Rijsbergen in Chapter 11

(page 11.4.2 ).

next up previous contents index 

Next: Multinomial distributions over words Up: Language models Previous: Finite automata and language Contents Index

© 2008 Cambridge University Press

This is an automatically generated page. In case of formatting errors you may want to look at the PDF edition of the book.

2009-04-07

