


 Home  Coding Ground   Jobs  Whiteboard   Tools  Corporate Training

  Teach with us 









What are the methods of Text Retrieval?

Data Mining

Database

Data Structure

Text retrieval is the process of transforming unstructured text into a structured format to identify meaningful patterns and new insights. By using advanced analytical techniques, including

Naïve Bayes, Support Vector Machines (SVM), and other deep learning algorithms, organizations are able to explore and ﬁnd hidden relationships inside their unstructured data. There are

two methods of text retrieval which are as follows −

Document Selection

Document Selection − In document selection methods, the query is regarded as deﬁning constraint for choosing relevant documents. A general approach of this category is the Boolean

retrieval model, in which a document is deﬁned by a set of keywords and a user provides a Boolean expression of keywords, such as car and repair shops, tea or coffee, or database systems

but not Oracle.

The retrieval system can take such a Boolean query and return records that satisfy the Boolean expression. Because of the complexity in prescribing a user’s data required exactly with a

Boolean query, the Boolean retrieval techniques usually only work well when the user understands a lot about the document set and can formulate the best query in this way.

Document ranking

Document ranking − Document ranking methods use the query to rank all records in the order of applicability. For ordinary users and exploratory queries, these techniques are more

suitable than document selection methods. Most current data retrieval systems present a ranked list of files in response to a user’s keyword query.

There are several ranking methods based on a huge spectrum of numerical foundations, such as algebra, logic, probability, and statistics. The common intuition behind all of these techniques

is that it can connect the keywords in a query with those in the records and score each record depending on how well it matches the query.

The objective is to approximate the degree of relevance of records with a score computed depending on the information including the frequency of words in the document and the whole set.

It is inherently difﬁcult to provide a precise measure of the degree of relevance between a set of keywords. For example, it is difﬁcult to quantify the distance between data mining and data

analysis.

The most popular approach of this method is the vector space model. The basic idea of the vector space model is the following: It can represent a document and a query both as vectors in a

high-dimensional space corresponding to all the keywords and use an appropriate similarity measure to evaluate the similarity among the query vector and the record vector. The similarity

values can then be used for ranking documents.

Ginni

Ginni

Updated on 25-Nov-2021 09:55:26

  0 Views

0 Views 

⎙ Print Article

   

  Related Articles

Related Articles



What is information retrieval?



What are the methods of clustering?



What are the methods of separation



What are the methods of outlier detection?



What are the methods of Audio Steganography?



What are the methods of Multi-factor authorization?



What are different methods of weeding?



What are the important methods of the SQLException class?



What are the techniques of Text Indexing?



What are the applications of Text Mining?



What are the techniques of Text Mining?



What are Hierarchical Methods?



What are the effective methods of Teaching and Learning?



What are the traditional methods of appraisal in accounting?



What are the modern methods of appraisal in accounting?

 Previous Page

 Previous Page Next Page 

Next Page  

Advertisements



☀





 About us

 About us

 Refund Policy

 Refund Policy

 Terms of use

 Terms of use

 Privacy Policy

 Privacy Policy

 FAQ's

 FAQ's

 Contact

 Contact

Annual Membership

Enjoy unlimited access on 5500+ Hand Picked Quality Video Courses

✓ Subscribe Now



 

 

 Login


&amp;nbsp;



 About us

 About us ✓ Refund Policy

 Refund Policy ✓ Terms of use

 Terms of use  Privacy Policy

 Privacy Policy  FAQ's

 FAQ's  Contact

 Contact

© Copyright 2023. All Rights Reserved.

