


 



 



 



 index  

Next: Ponte and Croft's Experiments Up: The query likelihood model Previous: Using query likelihood language Contents Index 

Estimating the query generation probability

In this section we describe how to estimate 



. The probability of producing the query given the LM 



 of document 



 using maximum

likelihood estimation ( MLE ) and the unigram assumption is: 



(100)

where 



 is the language model of document 



, 



 is the (raw) term frequency of term  in document 



, and 

 is the number of tokens in

document 



. That is, we just count up how often each word occurred, and divide through by the total number of words in the document 



. This is

the same method of calculating an MLE as we saw in Section 11.3.2 (page 

), but now using a multinomial over word counts.

The classic problem with using language models is one of estimation (the  symbol on the P's is used above to stress that the model is estimated):

terms appear very sparsely in documents. In particular, some words will not have appeared in the document at all, but are possible words for the

information need, which the user may have used in the query. If we estimate 

 for a term missing from a document 



, then we get a

strict conjunctive semantics: documents will only give a query non-zero probability if all of the query terms appear in the document. Zero

probabilities are clearly a problem in other uses of language models, such as when predicting the next word in a speech recognition application,

because many words will be sparsely represented in the training data. It may seem rather less clear whether this is problematic in an IR application.

This could be thought of as a human-computer interface issue: vector space systems have generally preferred more lenient matching, though recent

web search developments have tended more in the direction of doing searches with such conjunctive semantics. Regardless of the approach here,

there is a more general problem of estimation: occurring words are also badly estimated; in particular, the probability of words occurring once in

the document is normally overestimated, since their one occurrence was partly by chance. The answer to this (as we saw in probtheory) is

smoothing. But as people have come to understand the LM approach better, it has become apparent that the role of smoothing in this model is not

only to avoid zero probabilities. The smoothing of terms actually implements major parts of the term weighting component (Exercise 12.2.3 ). It is

not just that an unsmoothed model has conjunctive semantics; an unsmoothed model works badly because it lacks parts of the term weighting

component.

Thus, we need to smooth probabilities in our document language models: to discount non-zero probabilities and to give some probability mass to

unseen words. There's a wide space of approaches to smoothing probability distributions to deal with this problem. In Section 11.3.2 (page 

),

we already discussed adding a number (1, 1/2, or a small ) to the observed counts and renormalizing to give a probability distribution.

In this

section we will mention a couple of other smoothing methods, which involve combining observed counts with a more general reference probability

distribution. The general approach is that a non-occurring term should be possible in a query, but its probability should be somewhat close to but

no more likely than would be expected by chance from the whole collection. That is, if 

 then 

(101)

where 

 is the raw count of the term in the collection, and  is the raw size (number of tokens) of the entire collection. A simple idea that works

well in practice is to use a mixture between a document-specific multinomial distribution and a multinomial distribution estimated from the entire

collection: 

(102)

where 

 and 



 is a language model built from the entire document collection. This mixes the probability from the document with the

general collection frequency of the word. Such a model is referred to as a linear interpolation language model.

Correctly setting 



 is important

to the good performance of this model.

An alternative is to use a language model built from the whole collection as a prior distribution in a Bayesian updating process (rather than a

uniform distribution, as we saw in Section 11.3.2 ). We then get the following equation: 




(103)

Both of these smoothing methods have been shown to perform well in IR experiments; we will stick with the linear interpolation smoothing method

for the rest of this section. While different in detail, they are both conceptually similar: in both cases the probability estimate for a word present in

the document combines a discounted MLE and a fraction of the estimate of its prevalence in the whole collection, while for words not present in a

document, the estimate is just a fraction of the estimate of the prevalence of the word in the whole collection.

The role of smoothing in LMs for IR is not simply or principally to avoid estimation problems. This was not clear when the models were first

proposed, but it is now understood that smoothing is essential to the good properties of the models. The reason for this is explored in Exercise

12.2.3 . The extent of smoothing in these two models is controlled by the 



 and  parameters: a small value of 



 or a large value of  means

more smoothing. This parameter can be tuned to optimize performance using a line search (or, for the linear interpolation model, by other methods,

such as the expectation maximimization algorithm; see modelclustering). The value need not be a constant. One approach is to make the value a

function of the query size. This is useful because a small amount of smoothing (a ``conjunctive-like'' search) is more suitable for short queries, while

a lot of smoothing is more suitable for long queries.

To summarize, the retrieval ranking for a query 



 under the basic LM for IR we have been considering is given by: 

(104)

This equation captures the probability that the document that the user had in mind was in fact 



.

Worked example. Suppose the document collection contains two documents:

: Xyzzy reports a profit but revenue is down

: Quorus narrows quarter loss but revenue decreases further

The model will be MLE unigram models from the documents and collection, mixed with 

.

Suppose the query is revenue down. Then: 

(105)

 



(106)

(107)

 

(108)

So, the ranking is 

. End worked example.



 



 



 



 index  

Next: Ponte and Croft's Experiments Up: The query likelihood model Previous: Using query likelihood language Contents Index

© 2008 Cambridge University Press

This is an automatically generated page. In case of formatting errors you may want to look at the PDF edition of the book.

2009-04-07

