
FORBES

LEADERSHIP

LEADERSHIP STRATEGY

Large Language Models

Will Deﬁne Artiﬁcial

Intelligence

Gary Drenik Contributor



Artificial Intelligence ADOBESTOCK_138972731

In recent months, the Internet has been set ablaze

with the introduction for the public beta of ChatGPT.

People across the world shared their thoughts on

such an incredible development.

ChatGPT relies on a subsection of machine learning,

called large language models, that have already

shown to be both immensely useful and potentially

dangerous. I have sat down with an artificial

intelligence and machine learning expert, Martynas

Juravičius, from Oxylabs, a premium proxy and public

web data-acquisition solution provider, and members

of the company’s AI advisory board, Adi Andrei and Ali

Chaudhry, to discuss the importance of such models




and how they may shape our future.

Gary Drenik: What is a “large language model” and

why are they so important going forward?

Adi Andrei: LLMs are usually very large (billions to

hundreds of billions of parameters) deep-neural-

networks, which are trained by going through billions

of pages of material in a particular language, while

attempting to execute a specific task such as

predicting the next word(s) or sentences. As a result,

these networks are sensitive to contextual

relationships between the elements of that language

(words, phrases, etc).

For example, "I was sitting on a bank of snow waiting

for her". What is the meaning of "bank"? Bank - an

institution, bank - the act of banking, a riverbank, or a

plane banking to the left or right, or any other? While it

is an easy task even for a child, it is a nightmare for a

computer.

Previous models have been stuck at 65% accuracy for

decades, but now a standard BERT based (LLM)

model is able to do this in a reasonable time

(milliseconds) with an 85% - 90% accuracy.

As they are tweaked and improved, we will start

seeing a shift from using AI for static tasks like

classification, which can only serve a small number of

use cases, to entire linguistic processes being aided

by machine learning models, which can serve a

tremendous amount of use cases.

We already see such applications through ChatGPT,

Github Copilot, and many others.

Drenik: What do you think lies next for the

technology?


MORE FROM FORBES ADVISOR

Best Travel Insurance Companies

By Amy Danise Editor

Best Covid-19 Travel Insurance Plans

By Amy Danise Editor

Andrei: I think two major things will happen - the

usage of Large Language Models will become

significantly more pervasive and machine learning in

general will become more flexible. For the first part,

we’re already seeing that there’s a lot of potential for

LLM to create content and aid people of various

professions in their daily work.

We see more and more applications every day. There

are of course better new models for almost every

conceivable NLP task. However we have also seen

an emergence of derivative applications outside the

field of NLP, such as Open AI's DALL-e which uses a

version of their GPT-3 LLM trained to generate

images from text. This opens a whole new wave of

potential applications we haven't even dreamed of.

Drenik: What do you see as the practical applications

of large language models in business and individual

use?

Ali Chaudhry: One of the benefits of LLMs are that

they are extremely flexible and relatively easy to use.

While the integration capabilities, unless built in-

house, are somewhat lacking, these issues can be

fixed rather quickly.

I think businesses like ecommerce marketplaces will

start using LLMs to create product descriptions,

optimize existing content, and augment many other

tasks. Like with many automation tools, these will not

completely replace humans, at least in the foreseeable

future, but improve work efficiency.

There is some hope in using LLMs to aid in coding as

well. Github’s Copilot has been functioning rather well

and is an exciting new way to implement such machine

learning models to development.


Finally, there are issues in certain industries that can

be solved through LLMs. For example, according to a

recent Prosper Insights &amp; Analytics survey, live

customer support when shopping online is becoming

increasingly important for consumers with close to

55% finding it preferable. These issues are sometimes

solved by employing basic chatbots, however, LLMs

could provide a much more flexible and powerful

solution for businesses.

Prosper - Importance Of Live Customer Service When Shopping

Online PROSPER INSIGHTS &amp; ANALYTICS

Drenik: How will these technologies affect the

economy and businesses at a large scale?

Chaudhry: Such predictions, of course, are quite

difficult to make. Yet, we already see that LLMs will

have numerous applications with wide-ranging effects

in the long run. While they currently still require quite

intensive monitoring and fact-checking, further

improvements will reduce such inefficiencies, making

LLMs more independent from human intervention.

So, there’s no reason to believe that LLMs will not

have a similar impact, especially since they are so

much more flexible in the tasks they can help us

complete. There are some indicators that companies

realize the massive effect LLMs will have such as

Google issuing a “code red” over ChatGPT’s launch.

Finally, a whole new set of A.I. technologies and tools

might come from the fact that now we have access to

LLMs, which may disrupt, for better or worse, how we

do certain things, especially creative activities.

Drenik: What do you think are the potential flaws of

such models?


Andrei: There are two limitations for any machine

learning model - they’re a stochastic (i.e., based on

statistical probability, but not deterministic) processes

and they rely on immense volumes of data. In simple

terms, that means any machine learning model is

essentially making predictions based off of what it has

been fed.

These issues can be less pressing when we’re

dealing with numerical data as there’s less potential

for bias. LLMs, however, deal with natural language,

something that is inherently human and, as such, up

for interpretation and bias.

Historical events, for example, are often the subject of

much debate among scholars with some factual

strands that are peppered with interpretation. Finding

the one true description of such events is nearly

impossible, however, LLMs are still fed information

and they pick some statistically probable

interpretation.

Secondly, it’s important to underline that machine

learning models do not understand questions or

queries in the same way as humans. They technically

receive a set of data for which they have a predicted

outcome, which is the words that should follow one

after another. So, the accuracy and output completely

depends on the quality of data that it has been trained

on.

Finally, sometimes, models will also reflect the

uncomfortable biases in the reality they are modeling.

This is not to do with the data, or the model, but it is

rather with the fact that the model people would like to

believe about their reality is just not supported by the

data.

Drenik: How could companies optimize the data

gathering processes for large language models?

Martynas Juravičius: For LLMs, a large volume of

textual data is required and there are several ways to

go about it. Companies may use digitized books that

have been converted to text format for an easy way to


gather tons of data.

Such an approach is limited, however, as while the

data will be of high quality, it will stem only from a

highly specific source. To provide more accurate and

diverse outcomes, web scraping can be used to

gather immense volumes of information from the

publicly accessible Internet.

With such capabilities, creating a more powerful model

would be significantly easier as one could collect data

that reflects current use of language while providing

incredible source diversity. As a result, we believe that

web scraping provides immense value to the

development of any LLM by making data gathering

significantly easier.

Drenik: Thanks to all of you, for providing insights on

the importance of LLMs in the coming years.

Check out my website. 

Gary Drenik



ADVERTISEMENT

Editorial Standards

Reprints &amp; Permissions

