






 Menu



Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy



Search SEP



 Entry Navigation

Bayesʼ Theorem

First published Sat Jun 28, 2003; substantive revision Tue Sep 30, 2003

Bayes' Theorem is a simple mathematical formula used for calculating conditional probabilities. It figures prominently in

subjectivist or Bayesian approaches to epistemology, statistics, and inductive logic. Subjectivists, who maintain that

rational belief is governed by the laws of probability, lean heavily on conditional probabilities in their theories of evidence

and their models of empirical learning. Bayes' Theorem is central to these enterprises both because it simplifies the

calculation of conditional probabilities and because it clarifies significant features of subjectivist position. Indeed, the

Theorem's central insight — that a hypothesis is confirmed by any body of data that its truth renders probable — is the

cornerstone of all subjectivist methodology.



1. Conditional Probabilities and Bayes' Theorem



2. Special Forms of Bayes' Theorem



3. The Role of Bayes' Theorem in Subjectivist Accounts of Evidence



4. The Role of Bayes' Theorem in Subjectivist Models of Learning



Bibliography



Academic Tools



Other Internet Resources



Related Entries

1. Conditional Probabilities and Bayes' Theorem

The probability of a hypothesis H conditional on a given body of data E is the ratio of the unconditional probability of the

conjunction of the hypothesis with the data to the unconditional probability of the data alone.

(1.1) Definition.

The probability of H conditional on E is defined as P (H) = P(H &amp; E)/P(E), provided that both terms of this

ratio exist and P(E) &gt; 0.

To illustrate, suppose J. Doe is a randomly chosen American who was alive on January 1, 2000. According to the United

States Center for Disease Control, roughly 2.4 million of the 275 million Americans alive on that date died during the

2000 calendar year. Among the approximately 16.6 million senior citizens (age 75 or greater) about 1.36 million died. The

unconditional probability of the hypothesis that our J. Doe died during 2000, H, is just the population-wide mortality rate

P(H) = 2.4M/275M = 0.00873. To find the probability of J. Doe's death conditional on the information, E, that he or she

was a senior citizen, we divide the probability that he or she was a senior who died, P(H &amp; E) = 1.36M/275M = 0.00495,

by the probability that he or she was a senior citizen, P(E) = 16.6M/275M = 0.06036. Thus, the probability of J. Doe's

death given that he or she was a senior is P (H) = P(H &amp; E)/P(E) = 0.00495/0.06036 = 0.082. Notice how the size of the

total population factors out of this equation, so that P (H) is just the proportion of seniors who died. One should contrast

this quantity, which gives the mortality rate among senior citizens, with the "inverse" probability of E conditional on H,

P (E) = P(H &amp; E)/P(H) = 0.00495/0.00873 = 0.57, which is the proportion of deaths in the total population that

occurred among seniors.

Here are some straightforward consequences of (1.1):



Probability. P  is a probability function.







E

[1]

E

E

H

E

[2]








Logical Consequence. If E entails H, then P (H) = 1.



Preservation of Certainties. If P(H) = 1, then P (H) = 1.



Mixing. P(H) = P(E)P (H) + P(~E)P (H).

The most important fact about conditional probabilities is undoubtedly Bayes' Theorem, whose significance was first

appreciated by the British cleric Thomas Bayes in his posthumously published masterwork, "An Essay Toward Solving a

Problem in the Doctrine of Chances" (Bayes 1764). Bayes' Theorem relates the "direct" probability of a hypothesis

conditional on a given body of data, P (H), to the "inverse" probability of the data conditional on the hypothesis, P (E).

(1.2)

Bayes' Theorem.

P (H) = [P(H)/P(E)] P (E)

In an unfortunate, but now unavoidable, choice of terminology, statisticians refer to the inverse probability P (E) as the

"likelihood" of H on E. It expresses the degree to which the hypothesis predicts the data given the background information

codified in the probability P.

In the example discussed above, the condition that J. Doe died during 2000 is a fairly strong predictor of senior

citizenship. Indeed, the equation P (E) = 0.57 tells us that 57% of the total deaths occurred among seniors that year.

Bayes' theorem lets us use this information to compute the "direct" probability of J. Doe dying given that he or she was a

senior citizen. We do this by multiplying the "prediction term" P (E) by the ratio of the total number of deaths in the

population to the number of senior citizens in the population, P(H)/P(E) = 2.4M/16.6M = 0.144. The result is P (H) =

0.57 × 0.144 = 0.082, just as expected.

Though a mathematical triviality, Bayes' Theorem is of great value in calculating conditional probabilities because inverse

probabilities are typically both easier to ascertain and less subjective than direct probabilities. People with different views

about the unconditional probabilities of E and H often disagree about E's value as an indicator of H. Even so, they can agree

about the degree to which the hypothesis predicts the data if they know any of the following intersubjectively available

facts: (a) E's objective probability given H, (b) the frequency with which events like E will occur if H is true, or (c) the fact

that H logically entails E. Scientists often design experiments so that likelihoods can be known in one of these "objective"

ways. Bayes' Theorem then ensures that any dispute about the significance of the experimental results can be traced to

"subjective" disagreements about the unconditional probabilities of H and E.

When both P (E) and P

(E) are known an experimenter need not even know E's probability to determine a value for

P (H) using Bayes' Theorem.

(1.3)

Bayes' Theorem (2nd form).

P (H) = P(H)P (E) / [P(H)P (E) + P(~H)P

(E)]

In this guise Bayes' theorem is particularly useful for inferring causes from their effects since it is often fairly easy to

discern the probability of an effect given the presence or absence of a putative cause. For instance, physicians often screen

for diseases of known prevalence using diagnostic tests of recognized sensitivity and specificity. The sensitivity of a test,

its "true positive" rate, is the fraction of times that patients with the disease test positive for it. The test's specificity, its

"true negative" rate, is the proportion of healthy patients who test negative. If we let H be the event of a given patient having

the disease, and E be the event of her testing positive for it, then the test's sensitivity and specificity are given by the

likelihoods P (E) and P

(~E), respectively, and the "baseline" prevalence of the disease in the population is P(H). Given

these inputs about the effects of the disease on the outcome of the test, one can use (1.3) to determine the probability of

disease given a positive test. For a more detailed illustration of this process, see Example 1 in the Supplementary

Document "Examples, Tables, and Proof Sketches".

2. Special Forms of Bayes' Theorem

Bayes' Theorem can be expressed in a variety of forms that are useful for different purposes. One version employs what

Rudolf Carnap called the relevance quotient or probability ratio (Carnap 1962, 466). This is the factor PR(H, E) =

P (H)/P(H) by which H's unconditional probability must be multiplied to get its probability conditional on E. Bayes'

Theorem is equivalent to a simple symmetry principle for probability ratios.

(1.4)

Probability Ratio Rule.

PR(H, E) = PR(E, H)

The term on the right provides one measure of the degree to which H predicts E. If we think of P(E) as expressing the

"baseline" predictability of E given the background information codified in P, and of P (E) as E's predictability when H is

added to this background, then PR(E, H) captures the degree to which knowing H makes E more or less predictable relative

to the baseline: PR(E, H) = 0 means that H categorically predicts ~E; PR(E, H) = 1 means that adding H does not alter the

baseline prediction at all; PR(E, H) = 1/P(E) means that H categorically predicts E. Since P(E)) = P (E)) where T is any

E

E

E

~E

[3]

E

H

E

H

H

H

H

E

H

~H

E

[4]

E

H

H

~H

H

~H

E

H

T






truth of logic, we can think of (1.4) as telling us that

The probability of a hypothesis conditional on a body of data is equal to the unconditional probability of the

hypothesis multiplied by the degree to which the hypothesis surpasses a tautology as a predictor of the data.

In our J. Doe example, PR(H, E) is obtained by comparing the predictability of senior status given that J. Doe died in 2000

to its predictability given no information whatever about his or her mortality. Dividing the former "prediction term" by the

latter yields PR(H, E) = P (E)/P(E) = 0.57/0.06036 = 9.44. Thus, as a predictor of senior status in 2000, knowing that J.

Doe died is more than nine times better than not knowing whether she lived or died.

Another useful form of Bayes' Theorem is the Odds Rule. In the jargon of bookies, the "odds" of a hypothesis is its

probability divided by the probability of its negation: O(H) = P(H)/P(~H). So, for example, a racehorse whose odds of

winning a particular race are 7-to-5 has a 7/12 chance of winning and a 5/12 chance of losing. To understand the difference

between odds and probabilities it helps to think of probabilities as fractions of the distance between the probability of a

contradiction and that of a tautology, so that P(H) = p means that H is p times as likely to be true as a tautology. In

contrast, writing O(H) = [P(H) − P(F)]/[P(T) − P(H)] (where F is some logical contradiction) makes it clear that O(H)

expresses this same quantity as the ratio of the amount by which H's probability exceeds that of a contradiction to the

amount by which it is exceeded by that of a tautology. Thus, the difference between "probability talk" and "odds talk"

corresponds to the difference between saying "we are two thirds of the way there" and saying "we have gone twice as far as

we have yet to go."

The analogue of the probability ratio is the odds ratio OR(H, E) = O (H)/O(H), the factor by which H's unconditional

odds must be multiplied to obtain its odds conditional on E. Bayes' Theorem is equivalent to the following fact about odds

ratios:

(1.5)

Odds Ratio Rule.

OR(H, E) = P (E)/P

(E)

Notice the similarity between (1.4) and (1.5). While each employs a different way of expressing probabilities, each shows

how its expression for H's probability conditional on E can be obtained by multiplying its expression for H's unconditional

probability by a factor involving inverse probabilities.

The quantity LR(H, E) = P (E)/P

(E) that appears in (1.5) is the likelihood ratio of H given E. In testing situations like

the one described in Example 1, the likelihood ratio is the test's true positive rate divided by its false positive rate: LR =

sensitivity/(1 − specificity). As with the probability ratio, we can construe the likelihood ratio as a measure of the degree

to which H predicts E. Instead of comparing E's probability given H with its unconditional probability, however, we now

compare it with its probability conditional on ~H. LR(H, E) is thus the degree to which the hypothesis surpasses its

negation as a predictor of the data. Once more, Bayes' Theorem tells us how to factor conditional probabilities into

unconditional probabilities and measures of predictive power.

The odds of a hypothesis conditional on a body of data is equal to the unconditional odds of the hypothesis

multiplied by the degree to which it surpasses its negation as a predictor of the data.

In our running J. Doe example, LR(H, E) is obtained by comparing the predictability of senior status given that J. Doe died

in 2000 to its predictability given that he or she lived out the year. Dividing the former "prediction term" by the latter

yields LR(H, E) = P (E)/P

(E) = 0.57/0.056 = 10.12. Thus, as a predictor of senior status in 2000, knowing that J. Doe

died is more than ten times better than knowing that he or she lived.

The similarities between the "probability ratio" and "odds ratio" versions of Bayes' Theorem can be developed further if we

express H's probability as a multiple of the probability of some other hypothesis H* using the relative probability

function B(H, H*) = P(H)/P(H*). It should be clear that B generalizes both P and O since P(H) = B(H, T) and O(H) =

B(H, ~H). By comparing the conditional and unconditional values of B we obtain the Bayes' Factor:

BR(H, H*; E) = B (H, H*)/B(H, H*) = [P (H)/P (H*)]/ [P(H)/P(H*)].

We can also generalize the likelihood ratio by setting LR(H, H*; E) = P (E)/P

(E). This compares E's predictability on

the basis of H with its predictability on the basis of H*. We can use these two quantities to formulate an even more general

form of Bayes' Theorem.

(1.6)

Bayes' Theorem (General Form)

BR(H, H*; E) = LR(H, H*; E)

The message of (1.6) is this:

The ratio of probabilities for two hypotheses conditional on a body of data is equal to the ratio their

unconditional probabilities multiplied by the degree to which the first hypothesis surpasses the second as a

H

E

H

~H

H

~H

H

~H

E

E

E

H

H*






predictor of the data.

The various versions of Bayes' Theorem differ only with respect to the functions used to express unconditional

probabilities (P(H), O(H), B(H)) and in the likelihood term used to represent predictive power (PR(E, H), LR(H, E),

LR(H, H*; E)). In each case, though, the underlying message is the same:

conditional probability = unconditional probability × predictive power

(1.2) – (1.6) are multiplicative forms of Bayes' Theorem that use division to compare the disparities between

unconditional and conditional probabilities. Sometimes these comparisons are best expressed additively by replacing

ratios with differences. The following table gives the additive analogue of each ratio measure.

Table 1

Ratio

Difference

Probability Ratio 

PR(H, E) = P (H)/P(H)

Probability Difference 

PD(H, E) = P (H) − P(H)

Odds Ratio 

OR(H, E) = O (H)/O(H)

Odds Difference 

OD(H, E) = O (H) − O(H)

Bayes' Factor 

BR(H, H*; E) = B (H, H*)/B(H, H*)

Bayes' Difference 

BD(H, H*; E) = B (H, H*) − B(H, H*)

We can use Bayes' theorem to obtain additive analogues of (1.4) – (1.6), which are here displayed along with their

multiplicative counterparts:

Table 2

Ratio

Difference

(1.4)  PR(H, E) = PR(E, H) = P (E)/P(E)

 PD(H, E) = P(H) [PR(E, H) − 1]

(1.5)  OR(H, E) = LR(H, E) = P (E)/P

(E)

 OD(H, E) = O(H) [OR(H, E) − 1]

(1.6)  BR(H, H*; E) = LR(H, H*; E) = P (E)/P

(E)

 BD(H, H*; E) = B(H, H*) [BR(H, H*; E) − 1]

Notice how each additive measure is obtained by multiplying H's unconditional probability, expressed on the relevant

scale, P, O or B, by the associated multiplicative measure diminished by 1.

While the results of this section are useful to anyone who employs the probability calculus, they have a special relevance

for subjectivist or "Bayesian" approaches to statistics, epistemology, and inductive inference.  Subjectivists lean heavily

on conditional probabilities in their theory of evidential support and their account of empirical learning. Given that Bayes'

Theorem is the single most important fact about conditional probabilities, it is not at all surprising that it should figure

prominently in subjectivist methodology.

3. The Role of Bayes' Theorem in Subjectivist Accounts of Evidence

Subjectivists maintain that beliefs come in varying gradations of strength, and that an ideally rational person's graded

beliefs can be represented by a subjective probability function P. For each hypothesis H about which the person has a

firm opinion, P(H) measures her level of confidence (or "degree of belief") in H's truth.  Conditional beliefs are

represented by conditional probabilities, so that P (H) measures the person's confidence in H on the supposition that E is

a fact.

One of the most influential features of the subjectivist program is its account of evidential support. The guiding ideas of

this Bayesian confirmation theory are these:



Confirmational Relativity. Evidential relationships must be relativized to individuals and their degrees of belief.



Evidence Proportionism.  A rational believer will proportion her confidence in a hypothesis H to her total

evidence for H, so that her subjective probability for H reflects the overall balance of her reasons for or against its

truth.



Incremental Confirmation.  A body of data provides incremental evidence for H to the extent that conditioning on

the data raises H's probability.

The first principle says that statements about evidentiary relationships always make implicit reference to people and their

degrees of belief, so that, e.g., "E is evidence for H" should really be read as "E is evidence for H relative to the

information encoded in the subjective probability P".

According to evidence proportionism, a subject's level of confidence in H should vary directly with the strength of her

evidence in favor of H's truth. Likewise, her level of confidence in H conditional on E should vary directly with the

strength of her evidence for H's truth when this evidence is augmented by the supposition of E. It is a matter of some

delicacy to say precisely what constitutes a person's evidence,

 and to explain how her beliefs should be "proportioned"

E

E

E

E

E

E

H

H

~H

H

H*

[5]

[6]

E

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]






to it. Nevertheless, the idea that incremental evidence is reflected in disparities between conditional and unconditional

probabilities only makes sense if differences in subjective probability mirror differences in total evidence.

An item of data provides a subject with incremental evidence for or against a hypothesis to the extent that receiving the

data increases or decreases her total evidence for the truth of the hypothesis. When probabilities measure total evidence,

the increment of evidence that E provides for H is a matter of the disparity between P (H) and P(H). When odds are used

it is a matter of the disparity between O (H) and O(H). See Example 2 in the supplementary document "Examples, Tables,

and Proof Sketches", which illustrates the difference between total and incremental evidence, and explains the "baserate

fallacy" that can result from failing to properly distinguish the two.

It will be useful to distinguish two subsidiary concepts related to total evidence.



The net evidence in favor of H is the degree to which a subject's total evidence in favor of H exceeds her total

evidence in favor of ~H.



The balance of total evidence for H over H* is the degree to which a subject's total evidence in favor of H exceeds

her total evidence in favor of H*.

The precise content of these notions will depend on how total evidence is understood and measured, and on how disparities

in total evidence are characterized. For example, if total evidence is given in terms of probabilities and disparities are

treated as ratios, then the net evidence for H is P(H)/P(~H). If total evidence is expressed in terms of odds and differences

are used to express disparities, then the net evidence for H will be O(H) − O(~H). Readers may consult Table 3 (in the

supplementary document) for a complete list of the possibilities.

As these remarks make clear, one can interpret O(H) either as a measure of net evidence or as a measure of total evidence.

To see the difference, imagine that 750 red balls and 250 black balls have been drawn at random and with replacement from

an urn known to contain 10,000 red or black balls. Assuming that this is our only evidence about the urn's contents, it is

reasonable to set P(Red) = 0.75 and P(~Red) = 0.25. On a probability-as-total-evidence reading, these assignments reflect

both the fact that we have a great deal of evidence in favor of Red (namely, that 750 of 1,000 draws were red) and the fact

that we have also have some evidence against it (namely, that 250 of the draws were black). The net evidence for Red is

then the disparity between our total evidence for Red and our total evidence against Red. This can be expressed

multiplicatively by saying that we have seen three times as many red draws as black draws, which is just to say that O(Red)

= 3. Alternatively, we can use O(Red) as a measure of the total evidence by taking our evidence for Red to be the ratio of

red to black draws, rather than the total number of red draws, and our evidence for ~Red to be the ratio of black balls to red

balls, rather than the total number of black draws. While the decision whether to use O as a measure total or net evidence

makes little difference to questions about the absolute amount of total evidence for a hypothesis (since O(H) is an

increasing function of P(H)), it can make a major difference when one is considering the incremental changes in total

evidence brought about by conditioning on new information.

Philosophers interested in characterizing correct patterns of inductive reasoning and in providing "rational

reconstructions" of scientific methodology have tended to focus on incremental evidence as crucial to their enterprise.

When scientists (or ordinary folk) say that E supports or confirms H what they generally mean is that learning of E's truth

will increase the total amount of evidence for H's truth. Since subjectivists characterize total evidence in terms of

subjective probabilities or odds, they analyze incremental evidence in terms of changes in these quantities. On such views,

the simplest way to characterize the strength of incremental evidence is by making ordinal comparisons of conditional and

unconditional probabilities or odds.

(2.1)A Comparative Account of Incremental Evidence.

Relative to a subjective probability function P,



E incrementally confirms (disconfirms, is irrelevant to) H if and only if P (H) is greater than (less than,

equal to) P(H).



H receives a greater increment (or lesser decrement) of evidential support from E than from E* if and

only if P (H) exceeds P (H).

Both these equivalences continue to hold with probabilities replaced by odds. So, this part of the subjectivist theory of

evidence does not depend on how total evidence is measured.

Bayes' Theorem helps to illuminate the content of (2.1) by making it clear that E's status as incremental evidence for H is

enhanced to the extent that H predicts E. This observation serves as the basis for the following conclusions about

incremental confirmation (which hold so long as 1 &gt; P(H), P(E) &gt; 0).

(2.1a)  If E incrementally confirms H, then H incrementally confirms E.

(2.1b)  If E incrementally confirms H, then E incrementally disconfirms ~H.

(2.1c)  If H entails E, then E incrementally confirms H.

E

E

E

E

E*






(2.1d)  If P (E) = P (E*), then H receives more incremental support from E than from E* if and only if E is

unconditionally less probable than E*.

(2.1e) Weak Likelihood Principle. E provides incremental evidence for H if and only if P (E) &gt; P

(E). More

generally, if P (E) &gt; P

(E) and P

(~E) ≥ P

(~E), then E provides more incremental evidence for H than

for H*.

(2.1a) tells us that incremental confirmation is a matter of mutual reinforcement: a person who sees E as evidence for H

invests more confidence in the possibility that both propositions are true than in either possibility in which only one

obtains.

(2.1b) says that relevant evidence must be capable of discriminating between the truth and falsity of the hypothesis under

test.

(2.1c) provides a subjectivist rationale for the hypothetico-deductive model of confirmation. According to this model,

hypotheses are incrementally confirmed by any evidence they entail. While subjectivists reject the idea that evidentiary

relations can be characterized in a belief-independent manner — Bayesian confirmation is always relativized to a person

and her subjective probabilities — they seek to preserve the basic insight of the H-D model by pointing out that

hypotheses are incrementally supported by evidence they entail for anyone who has not already made up her mind about

the hypothesis or the evidence. More precisely, if H entails E, then P (H) = P(H)/P(E), which exceeds P(H) whenever 1

&gt; P(E), P(H) &gt; 0. This explains why scientists so often seek to design experiments that fit the H-D paradigm. Even when

evidentiary relations are relativized to subjective probabilities, experiments in which the hypothesis under test entails the

data will be regarded as evidentially relevant by anyone who has not yet made up his mind about the hypothesis or the data.

The degree of incremental confirmation will vary among people depending on their prior levels of confidence in H and E ,

but everyone will agree that the data incrementally supports the hypothesis to at least some degree.

Subjectivists invoke (2.1d) to explain why scientists so often regard improbable or surprising evidence as having more

confirmatory potential than evidence that is antecedently known. While it is not true in general that improbable evidence

has more confirming potential, it is true that E's incremental confirming power relative to H varies inversely with E's

unconditional probability when the value of the inverse probability P (E) is held fixed. If H entails both E and E*, say,

then Bayes' Theorem entails that the least probable of the two supports H more strongly. For example, even if heart attacks

are invariably accompanied by severe chest pain and shortness of breath, the former symptom is far better evidence for a

heart attack than the latter simply because severe chest pain is so much less common than shortness of breath.

(2.1e) captures one core message of Bayes' Theorem for theories of confirmation. Let's say that H is uniformly better

than H* as predictor of E's truth-value when (a) H predicts E more strongly than H* does, and (b) ~H predicts ~E more

strongly than ~H* does. According to the weak likelihood principle, hypotheses that are uniformly better predictors of the

data are better supported by the data. For example, the fact that little Johnny is a Christian is better evidence for thinking

that his parents are Christian than for thinking that they are Hindu because (a) a far higher proportion of Christian parents

than Hindu have Christian children, and (b) a far higher proportion of non-Christian parents than non-Hindu parents have

non-Christian children.

Bayes' Theorem can also be used as the basis for developing and evaluating quantitative measures of evidential support.

The results listed in Table 2 entail that all four of the functions PR, OR, PD and OD agree with one another on the simplest

question of confirmation: Does E provide incremental evidence for H?

(2.2)Corollary.

Each of the following is equivalent to the assertion that E provides incremental evidence in favor of H: PR(H, E)

&gt; 1, OR(H, E) &gt; 1, PD(H, E) &gt; 0, OD(H, E) &gt; 0.

Thus, all four measures agree with the comparative account of incremental evidence given in (2.1).

Given all this agreement it should not be surprising that PR(H, E), OR(H, E) and PD(H, E), have all been proposed as

measures of the degree of incremental support that E provides for H.

 While OD(H, E) has not been suggested for this

purpose, we will consider it for reasons of symmetry. Some authors maintain that one or another of these functions is the

unique correct measure of incremental evidence; others think it best to use a variety of measures that capture different

evidential relationships. While this is not the place to adjudicate these issues, we can look to Bayes' Theorem for help in

understanding what the various functions measure and in characterizing the formal relationships among them.

All four measures agree in their conclusions about the comparative amount of incremental evidence that different items

of data provide for a fixed hypothesis. In particular, they agree ordinally about the following concepts derived from

incremental evidence:



The effective increment of evidence

 that E provides for H is the amount by which the incremental evidence that E

provides for H exceeds the incremental evidence that ~E provides for H.



The differential in the incremental evidence that E and E* provide for H is the amount by which the incremental

evidence that E provides for H exceeds the incremental evidence that E* provides for H.

H

H

H

~H

H

H*

~H

~H*

E

H

[11]

[12]






Effective evidence is a matter of the degree to which a person's total evidence for H depends on her opinion about E. When

P (H) and P (H) (or O (H) and O (H)) are far apart the person's belief about E has a great effect on her belief about H:

from her point of view, a great deal hangs on E's truth-value when it comes to questions about H's truth-value. A large

differential in incremental evidence between E and E* tells us that learning E increases the subject's total evidence for H

by a larger amount than learning E* does. Readers may consult Table 4 (in the supplement) for quantitative measures of

effective and differential evidence.

The second clause of (2.1) tells us that E provides more incremental evidence than E* does for H just in case the

probability of H conditional on E exceeds the probability of H conditional on E*. It is then a simple step to show that all

four measures of incremental support agree ordinally on questions of effective evidence and of differentials in

incremental evidence.

(2.3)

Corollary.

For any H, E* and E with positive probability, the following are equivalent:



E provides more incremental evidence than E* does for H



PR(H, E) &gt; PR(H, E*)



OR(H, E) &gt; OR(H, E*)



PD(H, E) &gt; PD(H, E*)



OD(H, E) &gt; OD(H, E*)

The four measures of incremental support can disagree over the comparative degree to which a single item of data

incrementally confirms two distinct hypotheses. Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5 (in the supplement) show the

various ways in which this can happen.

All the differences between the measures have ultimately to do with (a) whether the total evidence in favor of a hypothesis

should be measured in terms of probabilities or in terms of odds, and (b) whether disparities in total evidence are best

captured as ratios or as differences. Rows in the following table correspond to different measures of total evidence.

Columns correspond to different ways of treating disparities.

Table 5: Four measures of incremental evidence

Ratio

Difference

P = Total

PR(H, E) = P (H)/P(H)

PD(H, E) = P (H) − P(H)

O = Total

OR(H, E) = O (H)/O(H)

OD(H, E) = O (H) − O(H)

Similar tables can be constructed for measures of net evidence and measures of balances in total evidence. See Table 5A in

the supplement.

We can use the various forms of Bayes' Theorem to clarify the similarities and differences among these measures by

rewriting each of them in terms of likelihood ratios.

Table 6: The four measures expressed in terms of likelihood ratios

Ratio

Difference

P = Total

PR(H, E) = LR(H, T; E)

PD(H, E) = P(H)[LR(H, T; E) − 1]

O = Total

OR(H, E) = LR(H, ~H; E)

OD(H, E)= O(H)[LR(H, ~H; E) − 1]

This table shows that there are two differences between each multiplicative measure and its additive counterpart. First, the

likelihood term that appears in a given multiplicative measure is diminished by 1 in its associated additive measure.

Second, in each additive measure the diminished likelihood term is multiplied by an expression for H's probability: P(H)

or O(H), as the case may be. The first difference marks no distinction; it is due solely to the fact that the multiplicative and

additive measures employ a different zero point from which to measure evidence. If we settle on the point of probabilistic

independence P (H) = P(H) as a natural common zero, and so subtract 1 from each multiplicative measure,

 then

equivalent likelihood terms appear in both columns.

The real difference between the measures in a given row concerns the effect of unconditional probabilities on relations of

incremental confirmation. Down the right column, the degree to which E provides incremental evidence for H is directly

proportional to H's probability expressed in units of P(T) or P(~H). In the left column, H's probability makes no

difference to the amount of incremental evidence that E provides for H once P (E) and either P(E) or P

(E) are fixed.

In light of Bayes' Theorem, then, the difference between the ratio measures and then difference measures boils down to

one question:

Does a given piece of data provide a greater increment of evidential support for a more probable hypothesis

than it does for a less probable hypothesis when both hypotheses predict the data equally well?

The difference measures answer yes, the ratio measures answer no.

E

~E

E

~E

E

E

E

E

E

[13]

H

~H

[14]






Bayes' Theorem can also help us understand the difference between rows. The measures within a given row agree about the

role of predictability in incremental confirmation. In the top row the incremental evidence that E provides for H increases

linearly with P (E)/P(E), whereas in the bottom row it increases linearly with P (E)/P

(E). Thus, when probabilities

measure total evidence what matters is the degree to which H exceeds T as a predictor of E, but when odds measure total

evidence it is the degree to which H exceeds ~H as a predictor of E that matters.

The central issue here concerns the status of the likelihood ratio. While everyone agrees that it should play a leading role

in any quantitative theory of evidence, there are conflicting views about precisely what evidential relationship it captures.

There are three possible interpretations.

Table 7: Three interpretations of the likelihood ratio

Probability as total

evidence reading



PR(H, E) measures incremental change in total evidence.



LR(H, E) measures incremental change in net evidence.



LR(H, H*, E) measures incremental change in the balance of evidence that E provides for H

over H*

Odds as total evidence

reading



LR(H, E) measures incremental changes in total evidence.



LR(H, E)  measures incremental change in net evidence.



LR(H, H*; E)/LR(~H, ~H*; E) measures incremental change in the balance of evidence that

E provides for H over H*.

"Likelihoodist" reading



Neither P nor O measures total evidence because evidential relations are essentially

comparative; they always involve the balance of evidence.



LR(H, E) measures the balance of evidence that E provides for H over H*.



LR(H, H*; E) measures the balance of evidence that E provides for H over H*.

On the first reading there is no conflict whatsoever between using probability ratios and using likelihood ratios to measure

evidence. Once we get clear on the distinctions between total evidence, net evidence and the balance of evidence, we see

that each of PR(H, E), LR(H, E) and LR(H, H*; E) measures an important evidential relationship, but that the relationships

they measure are importantly different.

When odds measure total evidence neither PR(H, E) nor LR(H, H*; E) plays a fundamental role in the theory of evidence.

Changes in the probability ratio for H given E only indicate changes in incremental evidence in the presence of

information about changes in the probability ratio for ~H given E. Likewise, changes in the likelihood ratio for H and H*

given E only indicate changes in the balance of evidence in light of information about changes in the likelihood ratio for

~H and ~H* given E. Thus, while each of the two functions can figure as one component in a meaningful measure of

confirmation, neither tells us anything about incremental evidence when taken by itself.

The third view, "likelihoodism," is popular among non-Bayesian statisticians. Its proponents deny evidence proportionism.

They maintain that a person's subjective probability for a hypothesis merely reflects her degree of uncertainty about its

truth; it need not be tied in any way to the amount of evidence she has in its favor.

 It is likelihood ratios, not subjective

probabilities, which capture the "scientifically meaningful" evidential relations. Here are two classic statements of the

position.

All the information which the data provide concerning the relative merits of two hypotheses is contained in the

likelihood ratio of the hypotheses on the data. (Edwards 1972, 30)

The ‘evidential meaning’ of experimental results is characterized fully by the likelihood function… Reports of

experimental results in scientific journals should in principle be descriptions of likelihood functions. (Brinbaum

1962, 272)

On this view, everything that can be said about the evidential import of E for H is embodied in the following generalization

of the weak likelihood principle:

The "Law of Likelihood". If H implies that the probability of E is x, while H* implies that the probability of E is x*,

then E is evidence supporting H over H* if and only if x exceeds x*, and the likelihood ratio, x/x*, measures the

strength of this support. (Hacking 1965, 106-109), (Royall 1997, 3)

The biostatistician Richard Royall is a particularly lucid defender of likelihoodism (Royall 1997). He maintains that any

scientifically respectable concept of evidence must analyze the evidential impact of E on H solely in terms of likelihoods;

it should not advert to anyone's unconditional probabilities for E or H. This is supposed to be because likelihoods are both

better known and more objective than unconditional probabilities. Royall argues strenuously against the idea that

incremental evidence can be measured in terms of the disparity between unconditional and conditional probabilities. Here

H

H

~H

2

[15]






is the gist of his complaint:

Whereas [LR(H, H*; E)] measures the support for one hypothesis H relative to a specific alternative H*, without

regard either to the prior probabilities of the two hypotheses or to what other hypotheses might also be considered,

the law of changing probability [as measured by PR(H, E)] measures support for H relative to a specific prior

distribution over H and its alternatives... The law of changing probability is of limited usefulness in scientific

discourse because of its dependence on the prior probability distribution, which is generally unknown and/or personal.

Although you and I agree (on the basis of the law of likelihood) that given evidence supports H over H*, and H** over

both H and H*, we might disagree about whether it is evidence supporting H (on the basis of the law of changing

probability) purely on the basis of our different judgments of the priori probability of H, H*, and H**. (Royall 1997,

10-11, with slight changes in notation)

Royall's point is that neither the probability ratio nor probability difference will capture the sort of objective evidence

required by science because their values depend on the "subjective" terms P(E) and P(H), and not just on the "objective"

likelihoods P (E) and P

(E).

Whether one agrees with this assessment will be a matter of philosophical temperament, in particular of one's willingness

to tolerate subjective probabilities in one's account of evidential relations. It will also depend crucially on the extent to

which one is convinced that likelihoods are better known and more objective than ordinary subjective probabilities. Cases

like the one envisioned in the law of likelihood, where hypotheses deductively entails a definite probability for the data,

are relatively rare. So, unless one is willing to adopt a theory of evidence with a very restricted range of application, a great

deal will turn on how easy it is to determine objective likelihoods in situations where the predictive connection from

hypothesis to data is itself the result of inductive inferences. However one comes down on these issues, though, there is

no denying that likelihood ratios will play a central role in any probabilistic account of evidence.

In fact, the weak likelihood principle (2.1e) encapsulates a minimal form of Bayesianism to which all parties can agree.

This is clearest when it is restated in terms of likelihoods.

(2.1e) The Weak Likelihood Principle. (expressed in terms of likelihood ratios)

If LR(H, H*; E) ≥ 1 and LR(~H, ~H*; ~E) ≥ 1, with one inequality strict, then E provides more incremental

evidence for H than for H* and ~E provides more incremental evidence for ~H than for ~H*.

Likelihoodists will endorse (2.1e) because the relationships described in its antecedent depend only on inverse

probabilities. Proponents of both the "probability" and "odds" interpretations of total evidence will accept (2.1e) because

satisfaction of its antecedent ensures that conditioning on E increases H's probability and its odds strictly more than those

of H*. Indeed, the weak likelihood principle must be an integral part of any account of evidential relevance that deserves

the title "Bayesian". To deny it is to misunderstand the central message of Bayes' Theorem for questions of evidence:

namely, that hypotheses are confirmed by data they predict. As we shall see in the next section, this "minimal" form of

Bayesianism figures importantly into subjectivist models of learning from experience.

4. The Role of Bayes' Theorem in Subjectivist Models of Learning

Subjectivists think of learning as a process of belief revision in which a "prior" subjective probability P is replaced by a

"posterior" probability Q that incorporates newly acquired information. This process proceeds in two stages. First, some of

the subject's probabilities are directly altered by experience, intuition, memory, or some other non-inferential learning

process. Second, the subject "updates" the rest of her opinions to bring them into line with her newly acquired knowledge.

Many subjectivists are content to regard the initial belief changes as sui generis and independent of the believer's prior

state of opinion. However, as long as the first phase of the learning process is understood to be non-inferential,

subjectivism can be made compatible with an "externalist" epistemology that allows for criticism of belief changes in

terms the reliability of the causal processes that generate them. It can even accommodate the thought that the direct effect

of experience might depend causally on the believer's prior probability.

Subjectivists have studied the second, inferential phase of the learning process in great detail. Here immediate belief

changes are seen as imposing constraints of the form "the posterior probability Q has such-and-such properties." The

objective is to discover what sorts of constraints experience tends to impose, and to explain how the person's prior

opinions can be used to justify the choice of a posterior probability from among the many that might satisfy a given

constraint. Subjectivists approach the latter problem by assuming that the agent is justified in adopting whatever eligible

posterior departs minimally from her prior opinions. This is a kind of "no jumping to conclusions" requirement. We

explain it here as a natural result of the idea that rational learners should proportion their beliefs to the strength of the

evidence they acquire.

The simplest learning experiences are those in which the learner becomes certain of the truth of some proposition E about

which she was previously uncertain. Here the constraint is that all hypotheses inconsistent with E must be assigned

probability zero. Subjectivists model this sort of learning as simple conditioning, the process in which the prior

H

~H






probability of each proposition H is replaced by a posterior that coincides with the prior probability of H conditional on E.

(3.1)Simple Conditioning

If a person with a "prior" such that 0 &lt; P(E) &lt; 1 has a learning experience whose sole immediate effect is to

raise her subjective probability for E to 1, then her post-learning "posterior" for any proposition H should be

Q(H) = P (H).

In short, a rational believer who learns for certain that E is true should factor this information into her doxastic system by

conditioning on it.

Though useful as an ideal, simple conditioning is not widely applicable because it requires the learner to become

absolutely certain of E's truth. As Richard Jeffrey has argued (Jeffrey 1987), the evidence we receive is often too vague or

ambiguous to justify such "dogmatism." On more realistic models, the direct effect of a learning experience will be to

alter the subjective probability of some proposition without raising it to 1 or lowering it to 0. Experiences of this sort are

appropriately modeled by what has come to be called Jeffrey conditioning (though Jeffrey's preferred term is "probability

kinematics").

(3.2)Jeffrey Conditioning

If a person with a prior such that 0 &lt; P(E) &lt; 1 has a learning experience whose sole immediate effect is to

change her subjective probability for E to q, then her post-learning posterior for any H should be Q(H) =

qP (H) + (1 − q)P (H).

Obviously, Jeffrey conditioning reduces to simple conditioning when q = 1.

A variety of arguments for conditioning (simple or Jeffrey-style) can be found in the literature, but we cannot consider

them here.

 There is, however, one sort of justification in which Bayes' Theorem figures prominently. It exploits

connections between belief revision and the notion of incremental evidence to show that conditioning is the only belief

revision rule that allows learners to correctly proportion their posterior beliefs to the new evidence they receive.

The key to the argument lies in marrying the "minimal" version of Bayesian expressed in the (2.1e) to a very modest

"proportioning" requirement for belief revision rules.

(3.3)The Weak Evidence Principle

If, relative to a prior P, E provides at least as much incremental evidence for H as for H*, and if H is

antecedently more probable than H*, then H should remain more probable than H* after any learning experience

whose sole immediate effect is to increase the probability of E.

This requires an agent to retain his views about the relative probability of two hypotheses when he acquires evidence that

supports the more probable hypothesis more strongly. It rules out obviously irrational belief revisions such as this: George

is more confident that the New York Yankees will win the American League Pennant than he is that the Boston Rex Sox

will win it, but he reverses himself when he learns (only) that the Yankees beat the Red Sox in last night's game.

Combining (3.3) with minimal Bayesianism yields the following:

(3.4)Consequence

If a person's prior is such that LR(H, H*; E) ≥ 1, LR(~H, ~H*; ~E) ≥ 1, and P(H) &gt; P(H*), then any learning

experience whose sole immediate effect is to raise her subjective probability for E should result in a posterior

such that Q(H) &gt; Q(H*).

On the reasonable assumption that Q is defined on the same set of propositions over which P is defined, this condition

suffices to pick out simple conditioning as the unique correct method of belief revision for learning experiences that

make E certain. It picks out Jeffrey conditioning as the unique correct method when learning merely alters one's

subjective probability for E. The argument for these conclusions makes use of the following two facts about probabilities.

(3.5)

Lemma

If H and H* both entail E when P(H) &gt; P(H*), then LR(H, H*; E) = 1 

and LR(~H, ~H*; ~E) &gt; 1.

Proof Sketch

(3.6)Lemma

Simple conditioning on E is the only rule for revising subjective probabilities that yields a posterior with the

following properties for any prior such that P(E) &gt; 0:

i. Q(E) = 1.

ii. Ordinal Similarity. If H and H* both entail E, then P(H) ≥ P(H*) if and 

only if Q(H) ≥ Q(H*).

E

E

~E

[16]






Proof Sketch

From here the argument for simple conditioning is a matter of using (3.4) and (3.5) to establish ordinal similarity. Suppose

that H and H* entail E and that P(H) &gt; P(H*). It follows from (3.5) that LR(H, H*; E) = 1 and LR(~H, ~H*; ~E) &gt; 1. (3.4)

then entails that any learning experience that raises E's probability must result in a posterior with Q(H) &gt; Q(H*). Thus, Q

and P are ordinally similar with respect to hypotheses that entail H. If we go on to suppose that the learning experience

raises E's probability to 1, then (3.6) then guarantees that Q arises from P by simple conditioning on E.

The case for Jeffrey conditioning is similarly direct. Since the argument for ordinal similarity did not depend at all on the

assumption that Q(E) = 1, we have really established

(3.7)

Corollary

• If H and H* entail E, then P(H) &gt; P(H*) if and only if Q(H) &gt; Q(H*).

• If H and H* entail ~E, then P(H) &gt; P(H*) if and only if Q(H) &gt; Q(H*).

So, Q is ordinally similar to P both when restricted to hypotheses that entail E and when restricted to hypotheses than

entail ~E. Moreover, since dividing by positive numbers does not disturb ordinal relationships, it also follows that that Q

is ordinally similar to P when restricted to hypotheses that entail E, and that Q  is ordinally similar to P when restricted

to hypotheses than entail ~E. Since Q (E) = 1 = Q (E), (3.6) then entails:

(3.8)

Consequence

For every proposition H, Q (H) = P (H) and Q (H) = P (H)

It is easy to show that (3.8) is necessary and sufficient for Q to arise from P by Jeffrey conditioning on E. Subject to the

constraint Q(E) = q, it guarantees that Q(H) = qP (H) + (1 −q)P (H).

The general moral is clear.

The basic Bayesian insight embodied in the weak likelihood principle (2.1e) entails that simple and Jeffrey

conditioning on E are the only rational ways to revise beliefs in response to a learning experience whose sole

immediate effect is to alter E's probability.

While much more can be said about simple conditioning, Jeffrey conditioning and other forms of belief revision, these

remarks should give the reader a sense of the importance of Bayes' Theorem in subjectivist accounts of learning and

evidential support. Though a mathematical triviality, the Theorem's central insight — that a hypothesis is supported by any

body of data it renders probable — lies at the heart of all subjectivist approaches to epistemology, statistics, and inductive

logic.

Bibliography



Armendt, B. 1980. "Is There a Dutch Book Argument for Probability Kinematics?", Philosophy of Science 47, 583-

588.



Bayes, T. 1764. "An Essay Toward Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances", Philosophical Transactions of

the Royal Society of London 53, 370-418. [Fascimile available online: the original essay with an introduction by his

friend Richard Price]



Birnbaum A. 1962. "On the Foundations of Statistical Inference", Journal of the American Statistical Association

53, 259-326.



Carnap, R. 1962. Logical Foundations of Probability, 2nd edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Chihara, C. 1987. "Some Problems for Bayesian Confirmation Theory", British Journal for the Philosophy of

Science 38, 551-560.



Christensen, D. 1999. "Measuring Evidence", Journal of Philosophy 96, 437-61.



Dale, A. I. 1989. "Thomas Bayes: A Memorial", The Mathematical Intelligencer 11, 18-19.



----- 1999. A History of Inverse Probability, 2nd edition. New York: Springer-Verlag.



Earman, J. 1992. Bayes or Bust? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



Edwards, A. W. F. 1972. Likelihood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Glymour, Clark. 1980. Theory and Evidence. Princeton: Princeton University Press.



Hacking, Ian. 1965. Logic of Statistical Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Hájek, A. 2003. "Interpretations of the Probability Calculus", in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (Summer

2003 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = &lt;https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2003/entries/probability-

interpret/&gt;

E

~E

E

~E

E

E

~E

~E

E

~E








Hammond, P. 1994. "Elementary non-Archimedean Representations for of Probability for Decision Theory and

Games," in P. Humphreys, ed., Patrick Suppes: Scientific Philosopher, vol. 1., Dordrecht: Kluwer Publishers, 25-

62.



Harper, W. 1976. "Rational Belief Change, Popper Functions and Counterfactuals," in W. Harper and C. Hooker,

eds., Foundations of Probability Theory, Statistical Inference, and Statistical Theories of Science, vol. I.

Dordrecht: Reidel, 73-115.



Hartigan, J. A. 1983. Bayes Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag.



Howson, Colin. 1985. "Some Recent Objections to the Bayesian Theory of Support", British Journal for the

Philosophy of Science, 36, 305-309.



Jeffrey, R. 1987. "Alias Smith and Jones: The Testimony of the Senses", Erkenntnis 26, 391-399.



----- 1992. Probability and the Art of Judgment. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Joyce, J. M. 1999. The Foundations of Causal Decision Theory. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. 1973. "On the psychology of prediction", Psychological Review 80, 237-251.



Kaplan, M. 1996. Decision Theory as Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



Levi, I. 1985. "Imprecision and Indeterminacy in Probability Judgment", Philosophy of Science 53, 390-409.



Maher, P. 1996. "Subjective and Objective Confirmation", Philosophy of Science 63, 149-174.



McGee, V. 1994. "Learning the Impossible," in E. Eells and B. Skyrms, eds., Probability and Conditionals. New

York: Cambridge University Press, 179-200.



Mortimer, Halina. 1988. The logic of induction, Ellis Horwood Series in Artificial Intelligence, New York; Halsted

Press.



Nozick, R. 1981. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.



Renyi, A. 1955. "On a New Axiomatic Theory of Probability", Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarium

Hungaricae 6, 285-335.



Royall, R. 1997. Statistical Evidence: A Likelihood Paradigm. New York: Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC.



Skyrms, B. 1987. "Dynamic Coherence and Probability Kinematics". Philosophy of Science 54, 1-20.



Sober, E. 2002. "Bayesianism — its Scope and Limits", in Swinburne (2002), 21-38.



Sphon, W. 1986. "The Representation of Popper Measures", Topoi 5, 69-74.



Stigler, S. M. 1982. "Thomas Bayes' Bayesian Inference", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A 145,

250-258.



Swinburne, R. 2002. Bayes' Theorem. Oxford: Oxford University Press (published for the British Academy).



Talbot, W. 2001. "Bayesian Epistemology", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2001 Edition), Edward N.

Zalta (ed.), URL = &lt;https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2001/entries/epistemology-bayesian/&gt;



Teller, P. 1976. "Conditionalization, Observation, and Change of Preference", in W. Harper and C.A. Hooker, eds.,

Foundations of Probability Theory, Statistical Inference, and Statistical Theories of Science. Dordrecht: D.

Reidel.



Williamson, T. 2000. Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



Van Fraassen, B. 1999. "A New Argument for Conditionalization". Topoi 18, 93-96.

Academic Tools



How to cite this entry.



Preview the PDF version of this entry at the Friends of the SEP Society.



Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).



Enhanced bibliography for this entry at PhilPapers, with links to its database.

Other Internet Resources



Fitelson, B. 2001. Studies in Bayesian Confirmation Theory, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin.

[Preprint in PDF available online] (750K download)



A Short Biography of Thomas Bayes (University of St. Andrews, MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive)



The International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA)










Related Entries

epistemology: Bayesian | probability, interpretations of

Copyright © 2003 by 

James Joyce &lt;jjoyce@umich.edu&gt;

Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

Please Read How You Can Help Keep the Encyclopedia Free

 Browse

Table of Contents

What's New

Random Entry

Chronological

Archives

 About

Editorial Information

About the SEP

Editorial Board

How to Cite the SEP

Special Characters

Advanced Tools

Contact

 Support SEP

Support the SEP

PDFs for SEP Friends

Make a Donation

SEPIA for Libraries

 Mirror Sites

View this site from another server:

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy is copyright © 2021 by The Metaphysics Research Lab, Department of Philosophy, Stanford University

Library of Congress Catalog Data: ISSN 1095-5054



 USA (Main Site)

Philosophy, Stanford University





