
 

 

Query Generation with External Knowledge for Dense Retrieval

DeeLIO (ACL) 2022  ·  Sukmin Cho, Soyeong Jeong, Wonsuk Yang, Jong Park 

 

Dense retrieval aims at searching for the most relevant documents to the given query by encoding texts in the embedding space, requiring a large

amount of query-document pairs to train. Since manually constructing such training data is challenging, recent work has proposed to generate

synthetic queries from documents and use them to train a dense retriever. However, compared to the manually composed queries, synthetic

queries do not generally ask for implicit information, therefore leading to a degraded retrieval performance. In this work, we propose Query

Generation with External Knowledge (QGEK), a novel method for generating queries with external information related to the corresponding

document. Specifically, we convert a query into a triplet-based template form to accommodate external information and transmit it to a pre-

trained language model (PLM). We validate QGEK on both in-domain and out-domain dense retrieval settings. The dense retriever with the

queries requiring implicit information is found to make good performance improvement. Also, such queries are similar to manually composed

queries, confirmed by both human evaluation and unique &amp; non-unique words distribution.

Code

No code implementations yet. Submit your code now

Tasks



 

 



 

Datasets



 ConceptNet

 



 MS MARCO

 



 HotpotQA

 



 FEVER

 



 SimpleQuestions

 



 TREC-COVID

 



 SciFact



 SciDocs

Results from the Paper

   Submit results from this paper to get state-of-the-art GitHub badges and help the community compare results to other papers.

Edit social preview

PDF

Abstract

 Edit

 Edit



Language Modelling



Retrieval

 Edit













 Edit


Methods

No methods listed for this paper. Add relevant methods here

Contact us on: 

 hello@paperswithcode.com. Papers With Code is a free resource with all data licensed under CC-BY-SA.

Terms

 Data policy

 Cookies policy

 from 

 Edit



