
Von Neumann entropy

Toggle the table of contents



 10

languages

Article

Talk

Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. (October 2021)

This article or section may be written in a style that is too abstract to be readily understandable by general audiences. (October 2021)

This article needs additional citations for verification. (October 2021)

In physics, the von Neumann entropy, named after John von Neumann, is an extension of the concept of Gibbs entropy from classical statistical mechanics to quantum statistical mechanics. For a quantum-mechanical

system described by a density matrix ρ, the von Neumann entropy is[1]

where  denotes the trace and ln denotes the (natural) matrix logarithm. If the density matrix ρ is written in a basis of its eigenvectors 

 as

then the von Neumann entropy is merely[1]

In this form, S can be seen as the information theoretic Shannon entropy.[1]

The von Neumann entropy is also used in different forms (conditional entropies, relative entropies, etc.) in the framework of quantum information theory to characterize the entropy of entanglement.[2]

Background [edit]



This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This section relies excessively on references to primary sources. (October 2021)

This section needs additional citations for verification. (October 2021)

John von Neumann established a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics in his 1932 work Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.[3] In it, he provided a theory of measurement, where the

usual notion of wave-function collapse is described as an irreversible process (the so-called von Neumann or projective measurement).

The density matrix was introduced, with different motivations, by von Neumann and by Lev Landau. The motivation that inspired Landau was the impossibility of describing a subsystem of a composite quantum system by a

state vector.[4] On the other hand, von Neumann introduced the density matrix in order to develop both quantum statistical mechanics and a theory of quantum measurements.

The density matrix formalism, thus developed, extended the tools of classical statistical mechanics to the quantum domain. In the classical framework, the probability distribution and partition function of the system allows

us to compute all possible thermodynamic quantities. Von Neumann introduced the density matrix to play the same role in the context of quantum states and operators in a complex Hilbert space. The knowledge of the

statistical density matrix operator would allow us to compute all average quantum entities in a conceptually similar, but mathematically different, way.

Let us suppose we have a set of wave functions |Ψ〉 that depend parametrically on a set of quantum numbers n1, n2, ..., nN. The natural variable which we have is the amplitude with which a particular wavefunction of the

basic set participates in the actual wavefunction of the system. Let us denote the square of this amplitude by p(n1, n2, ..., nN). The goal is to turn this quantity p into the classical density function in phase space. We have

to verify that p goes over into the density function in the classical limit, and that it has ergodic properties. After checking that p(n1, n2, ..., nN) is a constant of motion, an ergodic assumption for the probabilities p(n1, n2, ...,

nN) makes p a function of the energy only.

After this procedure, one finally arrives at the density matrix formalism when seeking a form where p(n1, n2, ..., nN) is invariant with respect to the representation used. In the form it is written, it will only yield the correct

expectation values for quantities which are diagonal with respect to the quantum numbers n1, n2, ..., nN.

Expectation values of operators which are not diagonal involve the phases of the quantum amplitudes. Suppose we encode the quantum numbers n1, n2, ..., nN into the single index i or j. Then our wave function has the

form

The expectation value of an operator B which is not diagonal in these wave functions, so

The role which was originally reserved for the quantities 

 is thus taken over by the density matrix of the system S.

Therefore, 〈B〉 reads

The invariance of the above term is described by matrix theory. The trace is invariant under cyclic permutations, and both the matrices ρ and B can be transformed into whatever basis is convenient, typically a basis of the

eigenvectors. By cyclic permutations of the matrix product, it can be seen that an identity matrix will arise and so the trace will not be affected by the change in basis. A mathematical framework was described where the

expectation value of quantum operators, as described by matrices, is obtained by taking the trace of the product of the density operator  and an operator  (Hilbert scalar product between operators). The matrix formalism

here is in the statistical mechanics framework, although it applies as well for finite quantum systems, which is usually the case, where the state of the system cannot be described by a pure state, but as a statistical

operator  of the above form. Mathematically,  is a positive-semidefinite Hermitian matrix with unit trace.

Definition [edit]

Given the density matrix ρ, von Neumann defined the entropy[5][6] as

which is a proper extension of the Gibbs entropy (up to a factor kB) and the Shannon entropy to the quantum case. To compute S(ρ) it is convenient (see logarithm of a matrix) to compute the eigendecomposition of 

. The von Neumann entropy is then given by

Since, for a pure state, the density matrix is idempotent, ρ = ρ2, the entropy S(ρ) for it vanishes. Thus, if the system is finite (finite-dimensional matrix representation), the entropy S(ρ) quantifies the departure of the system

from a pure state. In other words, it codifies the degree of mixing of the state describing a given finite system. Measurement decoheres a quantum system into something noninterfering and ostensibly classical; so, e.g.,

the vanishing entropy of a pure state 

, corresponding to a density matrix

increases to 

 for the measurement outcome mixture

as the quantum interference information is erased.

Properties [edit]

Some properties of the von Neumann entropy:

S(ρ) is zero if and only if ρ represents a pure state.

S(ρ) is maximal and equal to 

 for a maximally mixed state, N being the dimension of the Hilbert space.

S(ρ) is invariant under changes in the basis of ρ, that is, S(ρ) = S(UρU†), with U a unitary transformation.

S(ρ) is concave, that is, given a collection of positive numbers λi which sum to unity (

) and density operators ρi, we have








Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 19 January 2023, at 08:25 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a

non-profit organization.

v · t · e

S(ρ) satisfies the bound

where equality is achieved if the ρi have orthogonal support, and as before ρi are density operators and λi is a collection of positive numbers which sum to unity (

)

S(ρ) is additive for independent systems. Given two density matrices ρA , ρB describing independent systems A and B, we have

.

S(ρ) is strongly subadditive for any three systems A, B, and C:

This automatically means that S(ρ) is subadditive:

Below, the concept of subadditivity is discussed, followed by its generalization to strong subadditivity.

Subadditivity [edit]

If ρA, ρB are the reduced density matrices of the general state ρAB, then

This right hand inequality is known as subadditivity. The two inequalities together are sometimes known as the triangle inequality. They were proved in 1970 by Huzihiro Araki and Elliott H. Lieb.[7] While in Shannon's theory

the entropy of a composite system can never be lower than the entropy of any of its parts, in quantum theory this is not the case, i.e., it is possible that S(ρAB) = 0, while S(ρA) = S(ρB) &gt; 0.

Intuitively, this can be understood as follows: In quantum mechanics, the entropy of the joint system can be less than the sum of the entropy of its components because the components may be entangled. For instance, as

seen explicitly, the Bell state of two spin-½s,

is a pure state with zero entropy, but each spin has maximum entropy when considered individually in its reduced density matrix.[8] The entropy in one spin can be "cancelled" by being correlated with the entropy of the

other. The left-hand inequality can be roughly interpreted as saying that entropy can only be cancelled by an equal amount of entropy.

If system A and system B have different amounts of entropy, the smaller can only partially cancel the greater, and some entropy must be left over. Likewise, the right-hand inequality can be interpreted as saying that the

entropy of a composite system is maximized when its components are uncorrelated, in which case the total entropy is just a sum of the sub-entropies. This may be more intuitive in the phase space formulation, instead of

Hilbert space one, where the Von Neumann entropy amounts to minus the expected value of the ★-logarithm of the Wigner function, −∫ f ★ log★ f dx dp, up to an offset shift.[6] Up to this normalization offset shift, the

entropy is majorized by that of its classical limit.

Strong subadditivity [edit]

Main article: Strong subadditivity of quantum entropy

The von Neumann entropy is also strongly subadditive. Given three Hilbert spaces, A, B, C,

This is a more difficult theorem and was proved first by J. Kiefer in 1959[9][10] and independently by Elliott H. Lieb and Mary Beth Ruskai in 1973,[11] using a matrix inequality of Elliott H. Lieb[12] proved in 1973. By using the

proof technique that establishes the left side of the triangle inequality above, one can show that the strong subadditivity inequality is equivalent to the following inequality.

when ρAB, etc. are the reduced density matrices of a density matrix ρABC. If we apply ordinary subadditivity to the left side of this inequality, and consider all permutations of A, B, C, we obtain the triangle inequality for

ρABC: Each of the three numbers S(ρAB), S(ρBC), S(ρAC) is less than or equal to the sum of the other two.

See also [edit]

Entropy (information theory)

Linear entropy

Partition function (mathematics)

Quantum conditional entropy

Quantum mutual information

Quantum entanglement

Strong subadditivity of quantum entropy

Wehrl entropy

References [edit]

1. ^ a b c Bengtsson, Ingemar; Zyczkowski, Karol. Geometry of Quantum States: An Introduction to Quantum Entanglement (1st ed.). p. 301.

2. ^ Nielsen, Michael A. and Isaac Chuang (2001). Quantum computation and quantum information (Repr. ed.). Cambridge [u.a.]: Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 700. ISBN 978-0-521-63503-5.

3. ^ Von Neumann, John (1932). Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 3-540-59207-5.; Von Neumann, John (1955). Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-02893-4.

4. ^ Landau, L. (1927). "Das Daempfungsproblem in der Wellenmechanik". Zeitschrift für Physik. 45 (5–6): 430–464. Bibcode:1927ZPhy...45..430L . doi:10.1007/BF01343064 . S2CID 125732617 .

5. ^ Geometry of Quantum States: An Introduction to Quantum Entanglement, by Ingemar Bengtsson, Karol Życzkowski, p301

6. ^ a b Zachos, C. K. (2007). "A classical bound on quantum entropy". Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical. 40 (21): F407–F412. arXiv:hep-th/0609148 . Bibcode:2007JPhA...40..407Z . doi:10.1088/1751-

8113/40/21/F02 . S2CID 1619604 .

7. ^ Araki, Huzihiro; Lieb, Elliott H. (1970). "Entropy Inequalities" . Communications in Mathematical Physics. 18 (2): 160–170. Bibcode:1970CMaPh..18..160A . doi:10.1007/BF01646092 .

8. ^ Zurek, W. H. (2003). "Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical". Reviews of Modern Physics. 75 (3): 715–775. arXiv:quant-ph/0105127 . Bibcode:2003RvMP...75..715Z .

doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.75.715 . S2CID 14759237 .

9. ^ Kiefer, J. (July 1959). "Optimum Experimental Designs" . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological). 21 (2): 272–310. doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1959.tb00338.x .

10. ^ Ruskai, Mary Beth. "Evolution of a Fundemental [sic] Theorem on Quantum Entropy" . youtube.com. World Scientific. Archived  from the original on 2021-12-21. Retrieved 20 August 2020. "Invited talk at the Conference in Honour

of the 90th Birthday of Freeman Dyson, Institute of Advanced Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 26–29 August 2013. The note on Kiefer (1959) is at the 26:40 mark."

11. ^ Lieb, Elliott H.; Ruskai, Mary Beth (1973). "Proof of the Strong Subadditivity of Quantum-Mechanical Entropy" . Journal of Mathematical Physics. 14 (12): 1938–1941. Bibcode:1973JMP....14.1938L . doi:10.1063/1.1666274 .

Statistical mechanics

Theory

Principle of maximum entropy · ergodic theory



Statistical thermodynamics

Ensembles · partition functions · equations of state · thermodynamic potential: (U · H · F · G) · Maxwell relations

Models

Ferromagnetism models (Ising · Potts · Heisenberg · percolation) · Particles with force field (depletion force · Lennard-Jones potential)

Mathematical approaches

Boltzmann equation · H-theorem · Vlasov equation · BBGKY hierarchy · stochastic process · mean-field theory and conformal field theory

Critical phenomena

Phase transition · Critical exponents (correlation length · size scaling)

Entropy

Boltzmann · Shannon · Tsallis · Rényi · von Neumann

Applications

Statistical field theory (elementary particle · superfluidity) · Condensed matter physics · Complex system (chaos · information theory · Boltzmann machine)

Categories: Quantum mechanical entropy

John von Neumann




