








Statistical Language Modeling

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Automate your business at $5/day with Engati

REQUEST A DEMO



What is statistical language modeling in NLP? 

Statistical Language Modeling, or Language Modeling and LM for short, is the development of probabilistic models

that can predict the next word in the sequence given the words that precede it.

A statistical language model learns the probability of word occurrence based on examples of text. Simpler models

may look at a context of a short sequence of words, whereas larger models may work at the level of sentences or

paragraphs. Most commonly, language models operate at the level of words.

You could develop a language model and use it standalone for purposes like generating new sequences of text that

appear to have come from the body. 

Language modeling is a core problem for a rather wide range of natural language processing tasks. Language

models are generally used on the front-end or back-end of a more sophisticated model for a task that needs language

understanding.



Webinar | Grow your business with WhatsApp

Register now

Get your WhatsApp Chatbot for $5 a day

Claim now






What are the types of statistical language models?

Statistical models include the development of probabilistic models that are able to predict the next word in the

sequence, given the words that precede it. A number of statistical language models are in use already. Let’s take a

look at some of those popular models: 

1. N-Gram

This is one of the simplest approaches to language modelling. Here, a probability distribution for a sequence of ‘n’ is

created, where ‘n’ can be any number and defines the size of the gram (or sequence of words being assigned a

probability). If n=4, a gram may look like: “can you help me”. Basically, ‘n’ is the amount of context that the model is

trained to consider. There are different types of 

 models such as unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, etc. 

2. Exponential

This type of statistical model evaluates text by using an equation which is a combination of n-grams and feature

functions. Here the features and parameters of the desired results are already specified. The model is based on the

principle of entropy, which states that probability distribution with the most entropy is the best choice. Exponential

models have fewer statistical assumptions which mean the chances of having accurate results are more. 

3. Continuous Space

In this type of statistical model, words are arranged as a non-linear combination of weights in a 

. The

process of assigning weight to a word is known as 

. This type of model proves helpful in scenarios

where the data set of words continues to become large and include unique words. 

In cases where the data set is large and consists of rarely used or unique words, linear models such as n-gram do not

work. This is because, with increasing words, the possible word sequences increase, and thus the patterns predicting

the next word become weaker. 

3x your revenue with Chatbots and Live Chat

SCHEDULE A DEMO

How do you build a simple Statistical Language

Model?

Language models start with a 

. This is a simplifying assumption that the k+1st word is dependent

on the previous k words. A 2nd order assumption results in a Bigram model. The models are training using Maximum

Likelihood Estimations (MLE) of an existing corpus. The MLE approach then is simply a fraction of work counts.

There are some advantages of using tradition n-gram language models.

They are easy to train on a large corpus

They work surprisingly well in most tasks!!

However, they have some disadvantages

N-Gram

neural network

word embedding

Markov Assumption



Source:


What are the applications of statistical language

modeling?

 are used to generate text in many similar natural language processing tasks, such as:

1. Speech Recognization 

Voice assistants such as Siri and Alexa are examples of how language models help machines in processing speech

audio. 

2. Machine Translation

Google Translator and Microsoft Translate are examples of how NLP models can help in translating one language to

another. 

3. Sentiment Analysis 

This helps in 

 behind a phrase. This use case of NLP models is used in products that allow

businesses to understand a customer’s intent behind opinions or attitudes expressed in the text. Hubspot’s Service

Hub is an example of how language models can help in sentiment analysis.  

4. Text Suggestions

Google services such as Gmail or Google Docs use language models to help users get text suggestions while they

compose an email or create long text documents, respectively.  

5. Parsing Tools

 involves analyzing sentences or words that comply with syntax or grammar rules. Spell checking tools are

perfect examples of language modelling and parsing. 

Language models are also used to generate text in other similar language processing tasks like optical character

recognition, handwriting recognition, image captioning, etc.

What are the drawbacks of statistical language

modeling?

1. Zero probabilities

If we have a tri-gram language model that conditions of two words and has a vocabulary of 10,000 words. The we

have 10¹² triplets. If our training data has 10¹⁰ words, there are many triples that will never be observed in the training

data and thus the basic MLE will assign zero probabilities to those events. And a zero-probability translates to infinite

perplexity. To overcome this issue many techniques have been developed under the family of Smoothing Techniques.

A good overview of these techniques is presented in this paper.

2. Exponential Growth

The second challenge is that the number of n-grams grows as an nth exponent of the vocabulary size. A 10,000-word

vocabulary would have 10¹² tri-grams and a 100,000 word vocabulary will have 10¹⁵ trigrams.

3. Generalization

The last issue with MLE techniques is the lack of generalization. If the model sees the term ‘white horse’ in the training

Feedly

Blog

Statistical language models

analyzing sentiments

Parsing


data but does not see ‘black horse’, the MLE will assign zero probability to ‘black horse’. (Thankfully, it will assign zero

probability to Purple horse as well)

Continue Reading



TECH CORNER

Artificial Intelligence:

Deep Learning

Mar 15, 2023

3-4 mins





TECH CORNER

Artificial Intelligence -

Making work easier

than ever!

Mar 16, 2023

5-6 mins










DRIVE TO REIMAGINE

Hospitality with AI &amp;

personalisation is

bling

Feb 23, 2023

3-4 mins





VIEW OUR

BLOGS

Learn more, arrange a call back!

Name

Email

SUBMIT

ABOUT ENGATI

We, at Engati, believe that the way you deliver customer experiences can make or break your brand.

Our mission is to help you deliver unforgettable experiences to build deep, lasting connections with our Chatbot and

Live Chat platform.

PLATFORM

WHAT WE PROVIDE

WhatsApp Chatbot

Shopify Chatbot

AI Chatbot

Instagram Chatbot

Live Chat

WHAT WE ENABLE

Omnichannel Engagement

Multilingual Chatbot


Chatbot Training

Integrations

SOLUTIONS

INDUSTRIES TRANSFORMED

E-commerce &amp; Retail

Logistics

Travel &amp; Hospitality

Insurance &amp; Banking

Government

Edtech

Real Estate

LEARN MORE

Blogs

Glossary

Engatica

Customers

Engati vs Yellow

Engati vs Haptik

Engati vs Wati.io

Engati vs Chatbot.com

COMPANY

Careers We're Hiring

About Us

News

Partners

Contact Us

CUSTOMERS

PRICING

GET STARTED

Tutorials

Developer Docs

Bot Marketplace

Webinars





ALL SERVICES OPERATIONAL

FEATURED ON

Product Hunt

126














© 2021 Engati. All rights reserved

GDPR

Term of Use

Privacy Policy

