
JOURNAL ARTICLE

On the Convergence Properties of the EM Algorithm

C. F. Jeff Wu

The Annals of Statistics

Vol. 11, No. 1 (Mar., 1983), pp. 95-103 (9 pages)

Published By: Institute of Mathematical Statistics




https://www.jstor.org/stable/2240463

Abstract

Two convergence aspects of the EM algorithm are studied: (i) does the EM algorithm find a local maximum or a stationary

value of the (incomplete-data) likelihood function? (ii) does the sequence of parameter estimates generated by EM converge?

Several convergence results are obtained under conditions that are applicable to many practical situations. Two useful special…

cases are: (a) if the unobserved complete-data specification can be described by a curved exponential family with compact

parameter space, all the limit points of any EM sequence are stationary points of the likelihood function; (b) if the likelihood

function is unimodal and a certain differentiability condition is satisfied, then any EM sequence converges to the unique

maximum likelihood estimate. A list of key properties of the algorithm is included.

Journal Information

The Annals of Statistics publishes research papers of the highest quality reflecting the many facets of contemporary statistics.

Primary emphasis is placed on importance and originality, not on formalism. The discipline of statistics has deep roots in both

mathematics and in substantive scientific fields. Mathematics provides the language in which models and the properties of…

statistical methods are formulated. It is essential for rigor, coherence, clarity and understanding. Consequently, our policy is to

continue to play a special role in presenting research at the forefront of mathematical statistics, especially theoretical advances

that are likely to have a significant impact on statistical methodology or understanding. Substantive fields are essential for

continued vitality of statistics since they provide the motivation and direction for most of the future developments in statistics.

We thus intend to also publish papers relating to the role of statistics in interdisciplinary investigations in all fields of natural,

technical and social science. A third force that is reshaping statistics is the computational revolution, and The Annals will also

welcome developments in this area.

Publisher Information

The purpose of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS) is to foster the development and dissemination of the theory and

applications of statistics and probability. The Institute was formed at a meeting of interested persons on September 12, 1935,

in Ann Arbor, Michigan, as a consequence of the feeling that the theory of statistics would be advanced by the formation of an

…

organization of those persons especially interested in the mathematical aspects of the subject. The Annals of Statistics and The

Annals of Probability (which supersede The Annals of Mathematical Statistics), Statistical Science, and The Annals of

Applied Probability are the scientific journals of the Institute. These and The IMS Bulletin comprise the official journals of the

Institute. The Institute has individual membership and organizational membership. Dues are paid annually and include a

subscription to the newsletter of the organization, The IMS Bulletin. Members also receive priority pricing on all other IMS

publications.

Rights &amp; Usage

This item is part of a JSTOR Collection. 

For terms and use, please refer to our Terms and Conditions 

The Annals of Statistics © 1983 Institute of Mathematical Statistics 

Request Permissions

This is a preview. Log in through your library.

