
next up previous contents index 

Next: Probabilistic approaches to relevance Up: The Binary Independence Model Previous: Probability estimates in theory Contents Index 

Probability estimates in practice

Under the assumption that relevant documents are a very small percentage of the collection, it is plausible to approximate statistics for nonrelevant

documents by statistics from the whole collection. Under this assumption, 



 (the probability of term occurrence in nonrelevant documents for a

query) is 



 and 



(76)

In other words, we can provide a theoretical justification for the most frequently used form of idf weighting, which we saw in Section 6.2.1 .

The approximation technique in Equation 76 cannot easily be extended to relevant documents. The quantity 



 can be estimated in various ways:

1. We can use the frequency of term occurrence in known relevant documents (if we know some). This is the basis of probabilistic approaches

to relevance feedback weighting in a feedback loop, discussed in the next subsection.

2. Croft and Harper (1979) proposed using a constant in their combination match model. For instance, we might assume that 



 is constant

over all terms 



 in the query and that 

. This means that each term has even odds of appearing in a relevant document, and so the 



 and 

 factors cancel out in the expression for 

. Such an estimate is weak, but doesn't disagree violently with our hopes for

the search terms appearing in many but not all relevant documents. Combining this method with our earlier approximation for 



, the

document ranking is determined simply by which query terms occur in documents scaled by their idf weighting. For short documents (titles

or abstracts) in situations in which iterative searching is undesirable, using this weighting term alone can be quite satisfactory, although in

many other circumstances we would like to do better.

3. Greiff (1998) argues that the constant estimate of 



 in the Croft and Harper (1979) model is theoretically problematic and not observed

empirically: as might be expected, 



 is shown to rise with 

. Based on his data analysis, a plausible proposal would be to use the

estimate 

.

Iterative methods of estimation, which combine some of the above ideas, are discussed in the next subsection.

next up previous contents index 

Next: Probabilistic approaches to relevance Up: The Binary Independence Model Previous: Probability estimates in theory Contents Index

© 2008 Cambridge University Press

This is an automatically generated page. In case of formatting errors you may want to look at the PDF edition of the book.

2009-04-07

