
Memex

Toggle the table of contents



 21

languages

Article

Talk

Tools



Vannevar Bush

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

For the software company, see Memex Technology Limited.

Memex is a hypothetical electromechanical device for interacting with microform documents

and described in Vannevar Bush's 1945 article "As We May Think". Bush envisioned the

memex as a device in which individuals would compress and store all of their books, records,

and communications, "mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and

flexibility". The individual was supposed to use the memex as an automatic personal filing

system, making the memex "an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory".[1] The name

memex is a portmanteau of memory and expansion.

The concept of the memex influenced the development of early hypertext systems, eventually

leading to the creation of the World Wide Web, and personal knowledge base software.[2] The

hypothetical implementation depicted by Bush for the purpose of concrete illustration was

based upon a document bookmark list of static microfilm pages and lacked a true hypertext

system, where parts of pages would have internal structure beyond the common textual format.

Development [edit]

An electromechanical memex device [edit]

In "As We May Think", Vannevar Bush describes a memex as an electromechanical device enabling individuals to develop and read a

large self-contained research library, create and follow associative trails of links and personal annotations, and recall these trails at

any time to share them with other researchers. This device would closely mimic the associative processes of the human mind, but it

would be gifted with permanent recollection. As Bush writes, "Thus science may implement the ways in which man produces, stores,

and consults the record of the race".[3]

The technology used would have been a combination of electromechanical controls and microfilm cameras and readers, all integrated

into a large desk. Most of the microfilm library would have been contained within the desk, but the user could add or remove microfilm

reels at will. A memex would hypothetically read and write content on these microfilm reels, using electric photocells to read coded

symbols recorded next to individual microfilm frames while the reels spun at high speed, stopping on command. The coded symbols

would enable the memex to index, search, and link content to create and follow associative trails.

The top of the desk would have slanting translucent screens on which material could be projected for convenient reading. The top of

the memex would have a transparent platen. When a longhand note, photograph, memoranda, or other things were placed on the

platen, the depression of a lever would cause the item to be photographed onto the next blank space in a section of the memex film.

According to Bush, memex could become "a sort of mechanized private file and library".[4] The memex device as described by Bush

"would use microfilm storage, dry photography, and analog computing to give postwar scholars access to a huge, indexed repository of

knowledge any section of which could be called up with a few keystrokes."[5]

Associative trails [edit]

An associative trail as conceived by Bush would be a way to create a new linear sequence of microfilm frames across any arbitrary

sequence of microfilm frames by creating a chained sequence of links in the way just described, along with personal comments and

side trails. At the time, Bush saw the current ways of indexing information as limiting and instead proposed a way to store information

that was analogous to the mental association of the human brain: storing information with the capability of easy access at a later time

using certain cues (in this case, a series of numbers as a code to retrieve data).[6]

Other features [edit]

According to Bush, the memex would have features other than linking. The user could record new information on microfilm, by taking

photos from paper or from a touch-sensitive translucent screen. A user could "...insert a comment of his own, either linking it into the










Hypertext Editing System

(HES) IBM 2250 Display

console – Brown University 1969

main trail or joining it by a side trail to a particular item. ...Thus he builds a trail of his interest through the maze of materials available to

him."[7] A user could also create a copy of an interesting trail (containing references and personal annotations) and "...pass it to his

friend for insertion in his own memex, there to be linked into the more general trail."[7]

In September 1945, Life magazine published an illustration by Alfred D. Crimi showing the "Memex desk". According to Life magazine,

the Memex desk "would instantly bring files and material on an subject to the operator's fingertips". The mechanical core of the desk

would also include "a mechanism which automatically photographs longhand notes, pictures and letters, the file them in the desk for

future reference."[8]

Extending, storing, and consulting the record of the species [edit]

Bush's 1945 "As We May Think" idea for the memex extended far beyond a mechanism that might augment the research of one

individual working in isolation. In Bush's idea, the ability to connect, annotate, and share both published works and personal trails

would profoundly change the process by which the "world's record" is created and used:

Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready

to be dropped into the memex and there amplified. The lawyer has at his touch the associated opinions and decisions of

his whole experience, and of the experience of friends and authorities. The patent attorney has on call the millions of

issued patents, with familiar trails to every point of his client's interest. The physician, puzzled by a patient's reactions,

strikes the trail established in studying an earlier similar case, and runs rapidly through analogous case histories, with side

references to the classics for the pertinent anatomy and histology. ...

The historian, with a vast chronological account of a people, parallels it with a skip trail that stops only on the salient items

and can follow at any time contemporary trails which lead him all over civilization at a particular epoch. There is a new

profession of trailblazers, those who find delight in the task of establishing useful trails through the enormous mass of the

common record. The inheritance from the master becomes, not only his additions to the world's record but for his disciples

the entire scaffolding by which they were erected. — As We May Think

Legacy [edit]

Bush said of his "As We May Think" memex device that "technical difficulties of all sorts have been ignored," but that, "also ignored are

means as yet unknown which may come any day to accelerate technical progress as violently as did the advent of the thermionic

tube."[3] Michael Buckland concluded that Bush's 1945 vision for an information retrieval machine is unhistorically viewed in relation to

the subsequent development of electronic computer technology. Buckland studied the historical background of information retrieval in

and before 1939 because the Memex was based on Bush's work during 1938–1940 in building a photoelectric microfilm selector, an

electronic retrieval technology invented by Emanuel Goldberg for Zeiss Ikon in the 1920s. According to Buckland, the legacy of Bush is

twofold: a significant engineering achievement in building a rapid prototype microfilm selector, and "a speculative article" which through

"the social prestige of its author, has had an immediate and lasting effect in stimulating others."[9]

The pioneer of human–computer interaction Douglas Engelbart was inspired by Bush's proposal for a co-evolution between humans

and machines.[10] In a 1999 publication, Engelbart recollects that reading "As We May Think" in 1945 infected him with the idea of

building a mechanism that could navigate and extend the pool of human knowledge.[11] Around 1961, Engelbart re-read Bush's article,

and from 1962 onward Engelbart developed a series of technical designs.[12] Engelbart updated the Memex microfilm storage desk and

thereby arrived at a pioneering vision for a personal computer connected to an electronic visual display and a mouse pointing

device.[13] In 1962, Engelbart sent Bush a draft article for comment; Bush never replied. The article was published in 1963 under the

title "A Conceptual Framework for the Augmentation of Man's Intellect".[14]

In 1965, J. C. R. Licklider dedicated his book "Libraries of the Future" to Bush. Licklider wrote that

he had often heard of the memex and "trails of reference", even before he had read "As We May

Think".[15] Also in 1965, Ted Nelson coined the word hypertext in a paper that quoted Bush's memex

idea at length.[16] In 1968, Nelson collaborated with Andries van Dam to implement the Hypertext

Editing System (HES).[17] In his 1987 book entitled "Literary Machines", Nelson defined hypertext as

"non-sequential writing with reader-controlled links".[18] In 2000, Tim Berners-Lee published a

statement, acknowledging the influence of hypertext, the work of Engelbart and Bush's "As We May

Think" on the development of the World Wide Web.[15] In 2003, Microsoft promoted a life-logging

research project under the name MyLifeBits as an attempt to fulfill Bush's memex vision.[19]

1959 Memex II [edit]

In 1959, Vannevar Bush described an improved "Memex II".[20] In the manuscript draft of "Memex II" he wrote, "Professional societies

will no longer print papers..." and states that individuals will either order sets of papers to come on tape – complete with photographs

and diagrams – or download 'facsimiles' by telephone. Each society would maintain a 'master memex' containing all papers,

references, tables "intimately interconnected by trails, so that one may follow a detailed matter from paper to paper, going back

through the classics, recording criticism in the margins."[21]


1967 Memex revisited [edit]

In 1967, Vannevar Bush published a retrospective article entitled "Memex Revisited"[22] in his book Science Is Not Enough. Published

22 years after his initial conception of the Memex, Bush details the various technological advancements that have made his vision a

possibility. Specifically, Bush cites photocells, transistors, cathode ray tubes, magnetic and videotape, "high-speed electric circuits",

and "miniaturization of solid-state devices" such as the TV and radio. The article claims that magnetic tape would be central to the

creation of a modern Memex device. The erasable quality of the tape is of special significance, as this would allow for modification of

information stored in the proposed Memex.[22]

In the article, Bush stresses the continued importance of supplementing "how creative men think" and relates that the systems for

indexing data are still insufficient and rely too much on linear pathways rather than the association-based system of the human brain.

Bush writes that a machine with the "speed and flexibility" of the brain is not attainable, but improvements could be made in regard to

the capacity to obtain informational "permanence and clarity".[22]

Bush also relates that, unlike digital technology, Memex would be of no significant aid to business or profitable ventures, and as a

consequence, its development would occur only long after the mechanization of libraries and the introduction of what he describes as

the specialized "group machine", which would be useful for the sharing of ideas in fields such as medicine. Furthermore, although Bush

discusses the compressional ability and rapidity so key to modern machines, he relates that speed will not be an integral part of

Memex, stating that a tenth of a second would be an acceptable interval for its data retrieval, rather than the billionths of a second that

modern computers are capable of. "For Memex," he writes, "the problem is not swift access, but selective access". Bush states that

although the code-reading and potential linking capabilities of the rapid selector would be key to the creation of Memex, there is still an

issue of enabling "moderately rapid access to really large memory storage". There is an issue concerning selection, Bush conveys,

and despite the fact that improvements have been made in the speed of digital selection, according to Bush, "selection, in the broad

sense, is still a stone adze in the hands of the cabinetmaker". Bush goes on to discuss the record-making process and how Memex

could incorporate systems of voice-control and user-propagated learning.[22] He proposes a machine that could respond to "simple

remarks" as well as build trails[22] based on its user's "habits of association," as Belinda Barnet described them in "The Technical

Evolution of Vannevar Bush's Memex." Barnet also makes the distinction between the idea of a constructive Memex and the

"permanent trails" described in As We May Think, and attributes Bush's machine learning concepts to Claude Shannon's mechanical

mouse and work with "feedback and machine learning".[23]

See also [edit]

AltaVista

Card file

Commonplace book

Dublin Core

Hypomnema

Intelligence amplification

Metadata

Mundaneum

Office of the future

Paul Otlet

Project Xanadu

Victorian Internet

Web annotation

World Brain

References [edit]

1. ^ Montfort, Nick (2003). The New Media Reader. MIT Press. p. 135. ISBN 9780262232272..

2. ^ Davies, Stephen (February 2011). "Still Building The Memex". Communications of the ACM. 54 (2): 80–88.

doi:10.1145/1897816.1897840 . S2CID 9551946 ..

3. ^ a b Bush 1945, Section 8.

4. ^ Bush 1945, Section 6.

5. ^ Wardrip-Fruin &amp; Montfort 2003, p. 35.

6. ^ Kaz, Matt. "Vannevar Bush and Memex" . The World Wide Web: the Beginning and Now. University of Michigan..

7. ^ a b Bush 1945, Section 7.

8. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 27.

9. ^ Buckland, Michael K. (May 1992). "Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document Retrieval, And Vannevar Bush's Memex". Journal of the

American Society for Information Science. 43 (4): 284–94. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199205)43:4&lt;284::AID-ASI3&gt;3.0.CO;2-0 .

10. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 29.

11. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 44.


Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers

Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers

Statistics

Cookie statement





This page was last edited on 1 May 2023, at 05:53 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of

Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

12. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 45.

13. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 47.

14. ^ Barnet 2013, p. 48.

15. ^ a b Cronin 2006, p. 68.

16. ^ Warf, Barney (2018). The SAGE Encyclopedia of the Internet. SAGE. ISBN 9781526450432.

17. ^ Cartwright, William; Peterson, Michael P; Gartner, Georg (2013). Multimedia Cartography. Springer Science &amp; Business Media. p. 13.

ISBN 9783662037843.

18. ^ Cronin 2006, p. 66.

19. ^ Cronin 2006, p. 74.

20. ^ Cronin 2006, p. 57.

21. ^ Nyce, James M.; Kahn, Paul, eds. (1991). From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the Mind's Machine . Academic Press.

ISBN 9780125232708..

22. ^ a b c d e Bush 1967.

23. ^ Barnet, Belinda (2008-01-01). "The Technical Evolution of Vannevar Bush's Memex" . Digital Humanities. 2 (1).

Bibliography [edit]

Barnet, Belinda (2013). Memory Machines: The Evolution of Hypertext. Anthem Press. ISBN 9780857281968.

Bush, Vannevar (1967). 



Memex Revisited

 (PDF). Science is Not Enough.

Bush, Vannevar (Jul 1945). "As We May Think"

. The Atlantic Monthly. Vol. 176, no. 1. pp. 101–8.

Cronin, Blaise, ed. (2006). Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 2007. Information Today Inc.

ISBN 9781573872768.

Wardrip-Fruin, Noah; Montfort, Nick, eds. (2003). The New Media Reader. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-23227-2.

External links [edit]

"As We May Think - A Celebration of Vannevar Bush's 1945 Vision"

, at Brown University

Vannevar Bush and Memex

 – Living Internet

Categories: Computer-related introductions in 1945

Information science

Classification systems

History of computing

History of human–computer interaction

Multimodal interaction

Human–computer interaction

History of the Internet

Hypertext

Science studies



