




Machine Learning Interviews

Machine Learning Interviews

Tools to crack your data science Interviews

MENU



PREVIOUS

What order of Markov assumption does n-grams model make ?

NEXT

 

 

 

 

 

 

How do you generate text using a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) ?

How do you generate text using a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) ?

Posted on February 16, 2019

by MLNerds

The HMM is a latent variable model where the observed sequence of variables  are assumed to be generated from a set

of temporally connected latent  variables .

The joint distribution of the observed variables or data  and the latent variables  can be written as :

One possible interpretation of the latent variables in the HMM model is that they are POS tags. We will go with this

interpretation for simplicity, though the latent states could mean other things as well.

To generate text from a HMM, we need to know the transition matrix (the probability of going from one tag to another)

and the emission/output matrix (the probability of generating a token given the tag.) Given this :

First generate the state (tag)  .

We then generate all the other tags using

.

Then from each tag, generate a word(at each position ) using the distribution

. Note that this is possible because given the current tag , observed variable  doesn’t depend on 

 and 

.

Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing

 hmm, language model, text generation




How many parameters are there for an hMM model?

Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

COMMENT



NAME *



EMAIL *



WEBSITE



 NOTIFY ME OF FOLLOW-UP COMMENTS BY EMAIL.

 NOTIFY ME OF NEW POSTS BY EMAIL.

POST COMMENT

For more FREE Interview prep material: Subscribe with LinkedIn or Google



Search …

Search …






 

TAGS

TAGS

ACID properties activation function analytics anomaly detection atomicity bayesian modeling bi-grams 

bias in ML classification consistency decision boundary deep learning durability embeddings 

gender bias gradient descent hmm inner join join language model left join logistic regression 

maximum likelihood estimate metrics missing data MLE model complexity Natural Language Processing 

NLP

 optimization outer join outlier detection overfitting recall right join search sigmoid 

smoothing speaker segmentation speech sql tanh text generation topic modeling viterbi

RECENT POSTS

RECENT POSTS

What is Median Absolute Deviation

Risks When Building with LLMs and Generative AI

Building ML Models for Mixed Data

Gower Distance for Mixed Data

Understanding Mixed Data

Interview Preperation Question Bank:  

Popular Machine Learning Interview Questions with Answers

Popular Natural Language Processing (NLP) Interview Questions with Answers

Popular Deep Learning Interview Questions with Answers

Also check out our list of Top Machine Learning Interview Questions


Go to Home Page | Premium Tools | Data Scientist FAQ | More Videos | Privacy Policy | Returns and Refunds Policy | Terms

of Service | Contact Us



