
August 18, 2022

 

 

 

The Benefits of Large Language Models for

Document Classification

BACK TO RESOURCES

PREVIOUS



| NEXT



 



 

Large language models (LLMs) have been popular in the AI and deep learning communities due to their ability to

accurately solve a wide range of language tasks, such as sentiment analysis, classification, named entity

recognition, summarization, and even generation of new content and language. While more traditional natural

language processing models such as BERT need to be trained on each of these tasks individually, state-of-the-art

LLMs such as GPT have emergent capabilities: the ability to solve a wide range of tasks, even without being

specifically trained on those tasks. These emergent capabilities are because these LLMs don’t just process

language data, they develop a fundamental understanding of language structure and context that enable

them to solve language tasks with unprecedented flexibility and human-level accuracy.

While there has been significant interest in both academic research and press articles about the impressive

technical capabilities of LLMs, questions often remain about how these technical capabilities translate into

business impact, and how exactly these LLMS, such as GPT, are differentiated from more traditional technologies

such as BERT in real world scenarios.










 

PRODUCTS

Editor

AI is here. With SambaNova, customers are deploying the power of AI and deep learning in weeks rather than

years to meet the demands of the AI-enabled world. SambaNova’s flagship offering, Dataflow-as-a-Service , is a

complete solution purpose-built for AI and deep learning that overcomes the limitations of legacy technology to

power the large and complex models that enable customers to discover new opportunities, unlock new revenue

and boost operational efficiency. For more information please visit us at sambanova.ai or contact us

at info@sambanova.ai. Follow SambaNova Systems on LinkedIn.



TM

BACK TO RESOURCES

PREVIOUS



| NEXT



such as BERT in real world scenarios.

One way to better understand the business potential and accuracy advantages of LLMs such as GPT  is by

analyzing a specific task, such as document classification, and how it can be used to solve a specific business

challenge, such as automated email routing. 

In recent research, SambaNova’s GPT model was able to achieve a 4.4% accuracy advantage over BERT at

analyzing and predicting the topic of customer complaint emails. The emails in this research were often  lengthy

and complex, requiring the model to identify the part of the text containing the information required to determine

the email topic. 

The GPT model was able to achieve this 4.4% accuracy improvement when compared to BERT as a result of two

advantages:

First, a higher understanding of language context and meaning of the email, allowing the GPT model to

determine the topic of the email even in cases where the complaint topic was not directly mentioned in the

email.

Second, the technical capability to process a higher sequence length. Sequence length refers to the number

of tokens, or language data, that can be processed by a model at one time. The more language data that a

model can be analyzed at a time, the better understanding and context it can generate.

For a more detailed example of how GPT can achieve higher accuracy, and the importance of sequence

length, check out SambaNova’s latest demo and see if you can meet the GPT challenge.






RESOURCES

INDUSTRIES

ABOUT

CONTACT

Customers turn to SambaNova to quickly deploy state-of-the-art AI capabilities to meet the demands of

Customers turn to SambaNova to quickly deploy state-of-the-art AI capabilities to meet the demands of

the AI-enabled world. Our purpose-built enterprise-

the AI-enabled world. Our purpose-built enterprise-scale AI platform is the technology backbone for the

scale AI platform is the technology backbone for the

next generation of AI computing. We enable customers to unlock the valuable business insights 

next generation of AI computing. We enable customers to unlock the valuable business insights trapped

trapped

in their data. Our flagship offering, SambaNova Suite, overcomes the limitations of legacy technology

in their data. Our flagship offering, SambaNova Suite, overcomes the limitations of legacy technology

to power the large complex foundation 

to power the large complex foundation models that enable customers to discover new services and

models that enable customers to discover new services and

revenue streams, and boost operational efficiency. Headquartered in Palo Alto, California, 

revenue streams, and boost operational efficiency. Headquartered in Palo Alto, California, SambaNova

SambaNova

Systems was founded in 2017 by industry luminaries, and hardware and software design experts from

Systems was founded in 2017 by industry luminaries, and hardware and software design experts from

Sun/Oracle and Stanford University. 

Sun/Oracle and Stanford University. Investors include SoftBank Vision Fund 2, funds and accounts

Investors include SoftBank Vision Fund 2, funds and accounts

managed by BlackRock, Intel Capital, GV, Walden International, Temasek, GIC, Redline Capital,

managed by BlackRock, Intel Capital, GV, Walden International, Temasek, GIC, Redline Capital,

Atlantic Bridge Ventures, Celesta, and several others.

Atlantic Bridge Ventures, Celesta, and several others.

Headquarters:

Headquarters:

2200 Geng Road, Unit 100

2200 Geng Road, Unit 100

Palo Alto, CA 94303

Palo Alto, CA 94303

(650) 263-1153

(650) 263-1153

Terms &amp; Conditions 

Terms &amp; Conditions Privacy Policy

Privacy Policy

Copyright © 2023 SambaNova

Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.

