










https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00298

January 01 2020

What BERT Is Not: Lessons from a New Suite of Psycholinguistic

Diagnostics for Language Models 



 Author and Article Information

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2020) 8: 34–48.

Cite

Permissions

Abstract

Pre-training by language modeling has become a popular and successful approach to NLP tasks, but we have

yet to understand exactly what linguistic capacities these pre-training processes confer upon models. In this

paper we introduce a suite of diagnostics drawn from human language experiments, which allow us to ask

targeted questions about information used by language models for generating predictions in context. As a

case study, we apply these diagnostics to the popular BERT model, finding that it can generally distinguish

good from bad completions involving shared category or role reversal, albeit with less sensitivity than humans,

and it robustly retrieves noun hypernyms, but it struggles with challenging inference and role-based event

prediction— and, in particular, it shows clear insensitivity to the contextual impacts of negation.

1 Introduction

Pre-training of NLP models with a language modeling objective has recently gained popularity as a precursor

to task-specific fine-tuning. Pre-trained models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and ELMo (Peters et al., 2018a)

have advanced the state of the art in a wide variety of tasks, suggesting that these models acquire valuable,

generalizable linguistic competence during the pre-training process. However, though we have established the

benefits of language model pre-training, we have yet to understand what exactly about language these models

learn during that process.

This paper aims to improve our understanding of what language models (LMs) know about language, by

introducing a set of diagnostics targeting a range of linguistic capacities drawn from human psycholinguistic

experiments. Because of their origin in psycholinguistics, these diagnostics have two distinct advantages: They

are carefully controlled to ask targeted questions about linguistic capabilities, and they are designed to ask

these questions by examining word predictions in context, which allows us to study LMs without any need for

task-specific fine-tuning.

Beyond these advantages, our diagnostics distinguish themselves from existing tests for LMs in two primary

ways. First, these tests have been chosen specifically for their capacity to reveal insensitivities in predictive

models, as evidenced by patterns that they elicit in human brain responses. Second, each of these tests

Allyson Ettinger

Article history 

Share  

Views  


targets a set of linguistic capacities that extend beyond the primarily syntactic focus seen in existing LM

diagnostics—we have tests targeting commonsense/pragmatic inference, semantic roles and event

knowledge, category membership, and negation. Each of our diagnostics is set up to support tests of both

word prediction accuracy and sensitivity to distinctions between good and bad context completions. Although

we focus on the BERT model here as an illustrative case study, these diagnostics are applicable for testing of

any language model.

This paper makes two main contributions. First, we introduce a new set of targeted diagnostics for assessing

linguistic capacities in language models.

1 Second, we apply these tests to shed light on strengths and

weaknesses of the popular BERT model. We find that BERT struggles with challenging

commonsense/pragmatic inferences and role-based event prediction; that it is generally robust on within-

category distinctions and role reversals, but with lower sensitivity than humans; and that it is very strong at

associating nouns with hypernyms. Most strikingly, however, we find that BERT fails completely to show

generalizable understanding of negation, raising questions about the aptitude of LMs to learn this type of

meaning.

2 Motivation for Use of Psycholinguistic Tests on Language Models

It is important to be clear that in using these diagnostics, we are not testing whether LMs are

psycholinguistically plausible. We are using these tests simply to examine LMs’ general linguistic knowledge,

specifically by asking what information the models are able to use when assigning probabilities to words in

context. These psycholinguistic tests are well-suited to asking this type of question because a) the tests are

designed for drawing conclusions based on predictions in context, allowing us to test LMs in their most natural

setting, and b) the tests are designed in a controlled manner, such that accurate word predictions in context

depend on particular types of information. In this way, these tests provide us with a natural means of

diagnosing what kinds of information LMs have picked up on during training.

Clarifying the linguistic knowledge acquired during LM-based training is increasingly relevant as state-of-the-

art NLP models shift to be predominantly based on pre-training processes involving word prediction in context.

In order to understand the fundamental strengths and limitations of these models—and in particular, to

understand what allows them to generalize to many different tasks— we need to understand what linguistic

competence and general knowledge this LM-based pre-training makes available (and what it does not). The

importance of understanding LM-based pre-training is also the motivation for examining pre-trained BERT, as

we do in the present paper, despite the fact that the pre-trained form is typically used only as a starting point for

fine-tuning. Because it is the pre-training that seemingly underlies the generalization power of the BERT model,

allowing for simple fine-tuning to perform so impressively, it is the pre-trained model that presents the most

important questions about the nature of generalizable linguistic knowledge in BERT.

3 Related Work

This paper contributes to a growing effort to better understand the specific linguistic capacities achieved by

neural NLP models. Some approaches use fine-grained classification tasks to probe information in sentence

embeddings (Adi et al., 2016; Conneau et al., 2018; Ettinger et al., 2018), or token-level and other sub-

sentence level information in contextual embeddings (Tenney et al., 2019b; Peters et al., 2018b). Some of this

work has targeted specific linguistic phenomena such as function words (Kim et al., 2019). Much work has

attempted to evaluate systems’ overall level of “understanding”, often with tasks such as semantic similarity and

entailment (Wang et al., 2018; Bowman et al., 2015; Agirre et al., 2012; Dagan et al., 2005; Bentivogli et al.,

2016), and additional work has been done to design curated versions of these tasks to test for specific

linguistic capabilities (Dasgupta et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018; McCoy et al., 2019). Our diagnostics


complement this previous work in allowing for direct testing of language models in their natural setting—via

controlled tests of word prediction in context—without requiring probing of extracted representations or task-

specific fine-tuning.

More directly related is existing work on analyzing linguistic capacities of language models specifically. This

work is particularly dominated by testing of syntactic awareness in LMs, and often mirrors the present work in

using targeted evaluations modeled after psycholinguistic tests (Linzen et al., 2016; Gulordava et al., 2018;

Marvin and Linzen, 2018; Wilcox et al., 2018; Chowdhury and Zamparelli, 2018; Futrell et al., 2019). These

analyses, like ours, typically draw conclusions based on LMs’ output probabilities. Additional work has

examined the internal dynamics underlying LMs’ capturing of syntactic information, including testing of syntactic

sensitivity in different components of the LM and at different timesteps within the sentence (Giulianelli et al.,

2018), or in individual units (Lakretz et al., 2019).

This previous work analyzing language models focuses heavily on syntactic competence—semantic

phenomena like negative polarity items are tested in some studies (Marvin and Linzen, 2018; Jumelet and

Hupkes, 2018), but the tested capabilities in these cases are still firmly rooted in the notion of detecting

structural dependencies. In the present work we expand beyond the syntactic focus of the previous literature,

testing for capacities including commonsense/pragmatic reasoning, semantic role and event knowledge,

category membership, and negation—while continuing to use controlled, targeted diagnostics. Our tests are

also distinct in eliciting a very specific response profile in humans, creating unique predictive challenges for

models, as described subsequently.

We further deviate from previous work analyzing LMs in that we not only compare word probabilities—we also

examine word prediction accuracies directly, for a richer picture of models’ specific strengths and

weaknesses. Some previous work has used word prediction accuracy as a test of LMs’ language

understanding—the LAMBADA dataset (Paperno et al., 2016), in particular, tests models’ ability to predict the

final word of a passage, in cases where the final sentence alone is insufficient for prediction. However,

although LAMBADA presents a challenging prediction task, it is not well-suited to ask targeted questions

about types of information used by LMs for prediction—unlike our tests, LAMBADA is not controlled to isolate

and test the use of specific types of information in prediction. Our tests are thus unique in taking advantage of

the additional information provided by testing word prediction accuracy, while also leveraging the benefits of

controlled sentences that allow for asking targeted questions.

Finally, our testing of BERT relates to a growing literature examining linguistic characteristics of the BERT

model itself, to better understand what underlies the model’s impressive performance. Clark et al. (2019)

analyze the dynamics of BERT’s self-attention mechanism, probing attention heads for syntactic sensitivity and

finding that individual heads specialize strongly for syntactic and coreference relations. Lin et al. (2019) also

examine syntactic awareness in BERT by syntactic probing at different layers, and by examination of syntactic

sensitivity in the self-attention mechanism. Tenney et al. (2019a) test a variety of linguistic tasks at different

layers of the BERT model. Most similarly to our work here, Goldberg (2019) tests BERT on several of the

targeted syntactic evaluations described earlier for LMs, finding BERT to exhibit very strong performance on

these measures. Our work complements these approaches in testing BERT’s linguistic capacities directly via

the word prediction mechanism, and in expanding beyond the syntactic tests used to examine BERT’s

predictions in Goldberg (2019).

4 Leveraging Human Studies

The power in our diagnostics stems from their origin in psycholinguistic studies—the items have been carefully

designed for studying specific aspects of language processing, and each test has been shown to produce


informative patterns of results when tested on humans. In this section we provide relevant background on

human language processing, and explain how we use this information to choose the particular tests used here.

4.1 Background: Prediction in Humans

To study language processing in humans, psycholinguists often test human responses to words in context, in

order to better understand the information that our brains use to generate predictions. In particular, there are

two types of predictive human responses that are relevant to us here:

Cloze Probability

The first measure of human expectation is a measure of the “cloze” response. In a cloze task, humans are

given an incomplete sentence and tasked with filling their expected word in the blank. “Cloze probability” of a

word w in context c refers to the proportion of people who choose w to complete c. We will treat this as the best

available gold standard for human prediction in context—humans completing the cloze task typically are not

under any time pressure, so they have the opportunity to use all available information from the context to arrive

at a prediction.

N400 Amplitude

The second measure of human expectation is a brain response known as the N400, which is detected by

measuring electrical activity at the scalp (by electroencephalography). Like cloze, the N400 can be used to

gauge how expected a word w is in a context c—the amplitude of the N400 response appears to be sensitive

to fit of a word in context, and has been shown to correlate with cloze in many cases (Kutas and Hillyard, 1984).

The N400 has also been shown to be predicted by LM probabilities (Frank et al., 2013). However, the N400

differs from cloze in being a real-time response that occurs only 400 milliseconds into the processing of a

word. Accordingly, the expectations reflected in the N400 sometimes deviate from the more fully formed

expectations reflected in the untimed cloze response.

4.2 Our Diagnostic Tests

The test sets that we use here are all drawn from human studies that have revealed divergences between cloze

and N400 profiles—that is, for each of these tests, the N400 response suggests a level of insensitivity to

certain information when computing expectations, causing a deviation from the fully informed cloze predictions.

We choose these as our diagnostics because they provide built-in sensitivity tests targeting the types of

information that appear to have reduced effect on the N400—and because they should present particularly

challenging prediction tasks, tripping up models that fail to use the full set of available information.

5 Datasets

Each of our diagnostics supports three types of testing: word prediction accuracy, sensitivity testing, and

qualitative prediction analysis. Because these items are designed to draw conclusions about human

processing, each set is carefully constructed to constrain the information relevant for making word predictions.

This allows us to examine how well LMs use this target information.

For word prediction accuracy, we use the most expected items from human cloze probabilities as the gold

completions.

2 These represent predictions that models should be able to make if they access and apply all

relevant context information when generating probabilities for target words.

For sensitivity testing, we compare model probabilities for good versus bad completions— specifically,

comparisons on which the N400 showed reduced sensitivity in experiments. This allows us to test whether LMs






will show similar insensitivities on the relevant linguistic distinctions.

Finally, because these items are constructed in such a controlled manner, qualitative analysis of models’ top

predictions can be highly informative about information being applied for prediction. We leverage this in our

experiments detailed in Sections 6–9.

In all tests, the target word to be predicted falls in the final position of the provided context, which means that

these tests should function similarly for either left-to-right or bidirectional LMs. Similarly, because these tests

require only that a model can produce token probabilities in context, they are equally applicable to the masked

LM setting of BERT as to a standard LM. In anticipation of testing the BERT model, and to facilitate fair future

comparisons with the present results, we filter out items for which the expected word is not in BERT’s single-

word vocabulary, to ensure that all expected words can be predicted.

It is important to acknowledge that these are small test sets, limited in size due to their origin in psycholinguistic

studies. However, because these sets have been hand-designed by cognitive scientists to test predictive

processing in humans, their value is in the targeted assessment that they provide with respect to information

that LMs use in prediction.

We now we describe each test set in detail.

5.1 CPRAG-102: Commonsense and Pragmatic Inference

Our first set targets commonsense and pragmatic inference, and tests sensitivity to differences within semantic

category. The left column of Table 1 shows examples of these items, each of which consists of two sentences.

These items come from an influential human study by Federmeier and Kutas (1999), which tested how brains

would respond to different types of context completions, shown in the right columns of Table 1.

Table 1: 

Example items from CPRAG-102 dataset.

Context

Expected

He complained that after she kissed him, he couldn’t get the red color off his face. He finally just asked her to stop wearing that ____ 

lipstick 

He caught the pass and scored another touchdown. There was nothing he enjoyed more than a good game of ____ 

football 

Information Needed for Prediction

Accurate prediction on this set requires use of commonsense reasoning to infer what is being described in the

first sentence, and pragmatic reasoning to determine how the second sentence relates. For instance, in Table

1, commonsense knowledge informs us that red color left by kisses suggests lipstick, and pragmatic reasoning

allows us to infer that the thing to stop wearing is related to the complaint. As in LAMBADA, the final sentence

is generic, not supporting prediction on its own. Unlike LAMBADA, the consistent structure of these items

allows us to target specific model capabilities;

3 additionally, none of these items contain the target word in

context,

4 forcing models to use commonsense inference rather than coreference. Human cloze probabilities

show a high level of agreement on appropriate completions for these items—average cloze probability for

expected completions is .74.

Sensitivity Test

The Federmeier and Kutas (1999) study found that while the inappropriate completions (e.g., mascara,


bracelet) had cloze probabilities of virtually zero (average cloze .004 and .001, respectively), the N400 showed

some expectation for completions that shared a semantic category with the expected completion (e.g.,

mascara, by relation to lipstick). Our sensitivity test targets this distinction, testing whether LMs will favor

inappropriate completions based on shared semantic category with expected completions.

Data

The authors of the original study make available 40 of their contexts—we filter out six to accommodate BERT’s

single-word vocabulary,

5 for a final set of 34 contexts, 102 total items.

6

5.2 ROLE-88: Event Knowledge and Semantic Role Sensitivity

Our second set targets event knowledge and semantic role interpretation, and tests sensitivity to impact of role

reversals. Table 2 shows an example item pair from this set. These items come from a human experiment by

Chow et al. (2016), which tested the brain’s sensitivity to role reversals.

Table 2: 

Example items from ROLE-88 dataset. Compl = Context Completion.

Context

Compl.

the restaurant owner forgot which customer the waitress had ____ 

served 

the restaurant owner forgot which waitress the customer had ____ 

served 

Information Needed for Prediction

Accurate prediction on this set requires a model to interpret semantic roles from sentence syntax, and apply

event knowledge about typical interactions between types of entities in the given roles. The set has reversals

for each noun pair (shown in Table 2) so models must distinguish roles for each order.

Sensitivity Test

The Chow et al. (2016) study found that although each completion (e.g., served) is good for only one of the

noun orders and not the reverse, the N400 shows a similar level of expectation for the target completions

regardless of noun order. Our sensitivity test targets this distinction, testing whether LMs will show similar

difficulty distinguishing appropriate continuations based on word order and semantic role. Human cloze

probabilities show strong sensitivity to the role reversal, with average cloze difference of .233 between good

and bad contexts for a given completion.

Data

The authors provide 120 sentences (60 pairs)—which we filter to 88 final items, removing pairs for which the

best completion of either context is not in BERT’s single-word vocabulary.

5.3 NEG-136: Negation

Our third set targets understanding of the meaning of negation, along with knowledge of category membership.

Table 3 shows examples of these test items, which involve absence or presence of negation in simple

sentences, with two different completions that vary in truth depending on the negation. These test items come

from a human study by Fischler et al. (1983), which examined how human expectations change with the

addition of negation.


Table 3: 

Example items from NEG-136-SIMP dataset.

Context

Match

Mismatch

A robin is a ____ 

bird 

tree 

A robin is not a ____ 

bird 

tree 

Information Needed for Prediction

Because the negative contexts in these items are highly unconstraining (A robin is not a ____ ?), prediction

accuracy is not a useful measure for the negative contexts. We test prediction accuracy for affirmative contexts

only, which allows us to test models’ use of hypernym information (robin = bird). Targeting of negation happens

in the sensitivity test.

Sensitivity Test

The Fischler et al. (1983) study found that although the N400 shows more expectation for true completions in

affirmative sentences (e.g., A robin is a bird), it fails to adjust to negation, showing more expectation for false

continuations in negative sentences (e.g., A robin is not a bird). Our sensitivity test targets this distinction,

testing whether LMs will show similar insensitivity to impacts of negation. Note that here we use truth judgments

rather than cloze probability as an indication of the quality of a completion.

Data

Fischler et al. provide the list of 18 subject nouns and 9 category nouns that they use for their sentences, which

we use to generate a comparable dataset, for a total of 72 items.

7 We refer to these 72 simple sentences as

NEG-136-SIMP. All target words are in BERT’s single-word vocabulary.

Supplementary Items

In a subsequent study, Nieuwland and Kuperberg (2008) followed up on the Fischler et al. (1983) experiment,

creating affirmative and negative sentences chosen to be more “natural ... for somebody to say”, and

contrasting these with affirmative and negative sentences chosen to be less natural. “Natural” items include

examples like Most smokers find that quitting is (not) very (difficult/easy), while items designed to be less

natural include examples like Vitamins and proteins are (not) very (good/bad). The authors share 16 base

contexts, corresponding to 64 additional items, which we add to the original 72 for additional comparison. All

target words are in BERT’s single-word vocabulary. We refer to these supplementary 64 items, designed to

test effects of naturalness, as NEG-136-NAT.

6 Experiments

As a case study, we use these three diagnostics to examine the predictive capacities of the pre-trained BERT

model (Devlin et al., 2019), which has been the basis of impressive performance across a wide range of tasks.

BERT is a deep bidirectional transformer network (Vaswani et al., 2017) pre-trained on tasks of masked

language modeling (predicting masked words given bidirectional context) and next-sentence prediction (binary

classification of whether two sentences are a sequence). We test two versions of the pre- trained model:

BERTBASE and BERTLARGE (uncased). These versions have the same basic architecture, but BERTLARGE has

more parameters—in total, BERTBASE has 110M parameters, and BERTLARGE has 340M. We use the PyTorch

BERT implementation with masked language modeling parameters for generating word predictions.

8


For testing, we process our sentence contexts to have a [MASK] token—also used during BERT’s pre-training

—in the target position of interest. We then measure BERT’s predictions for this [MASK] token’s position.

Following Goldberg (2019), we also add a [CLS] token to the start of each sentence to mimic BERT’s training

conditions.

BERT differs from traditional left-to-right language models, and from real-time human predictions, in being a

bidirectional model able to use information from both left and right context. This difference should be

neutralized by the fact that our items provide all information in the left context—however, in our experiments

here, we do allow one advantage for BERT’s bidirectionality: We include a period and a [SEP] token after each

[MASK] token, to indicate that the target position is followed by the end of the sentence. We do this in order to

give BERT the best possible chance of success, by maximizing the chance of predicting a single word rather

than the start of a phrase. Items for these experiments thus appear as follows:

[CLS] The restaurant owner forgot which customer the waitress had [MASK] . [SEP]

Logits produced by the language model for the target position are softmax-transformed to obtain probabilities

comparable to human cloze probability values for those target positions.

9

7 Results for CPRAG-102

First we report BERT’s results on the CPRAG-102 test targeting common sense, pragmatic reasoning, and

sensitivity within semantic category.

7.1 Word Prediction Accuracies

We define accuracy as percentage of items for which the “expected” completion is among the model’s top k

predictions, with k = 1 and k = 5.

Table 4 (“Orig”) shows accuracies of BERTBASE and BERTLARGE. For accuracy at k = 1, BERT LARGE soundly

outperforms BERTBASE with correct predictions on just over a third of contexts. Expanding to k = 5, the models

converge on the same accuracy, identifying the expected completion for about half of contexts.

10

Table 4: 

CPRAG-102 word prediction accuracies (with and without sentence perturbations). Shuf = first sentence

shuffled; Trunc = second sentence truncated to two words before target.

Orig

Shuf

Trunc

Shuf + Trunc

BERTBASE k = 1 

23.5 

14.1 ± 3.1 

14.7 

8.1 ± 3.4 

BERTLARGE k = 1 

35.3 

17.4 ± 3.5 

17.6 

10.0 ± 3.0 

BERTBASE k = 5 

52.9 

36.1 ± 2.8 

35.3 

22.1 ± 3.2 

BERTLARGE k = 5 

52.9 

39.2 ± 3.9 

32.4 

21.3 ± 3.7 

Because commonsense and pragmatic reasoning are non-trivial concepts to pin down, it is worth asking to

what extent BERT can achieve this performance based on simpler cues like word identities or n-gram context.

To test importance of word order, we shuffle the words in each item’s first sentence, garbling the message but

leaving all individual words intact (“Shuf” in Table 4). To test adequacy of n-gram context, we truncate the

second sentence, removing all but the two words preceding the target word (“Trunc”)—leaving generally

enough syntactic context to identify the part of speech, as well as some sense of semantic category (on top of


the thematic setup of the first sentence), but removing other information from that second sentence. We also

test with both perturbations together (“Shuf + Trunc”). Because different shuffled word orders give rise to

different results, for the “Shuf” and “Shuf + Trunc” settings we show mean and standard deviation from 100

runs.

Table 4 shows the accuracies as a result of these perturbations. One thing that is immediately clear is that the

BERT model is indeed making use of information provided by the word order of the first sentence, and by the

more distant content of the second sentence, as each of these individual perturbations causes a notable drop

in accuracy. It is worth noting, however, that with each perturbation there is a subset of items for which BERT’s

accuracy remains intact. Unsurprisingly, many of these items are those containing particularly distinctive words

associated with the target, such as checkmate (chess), touchdown (football), and stone-washed (jeans). This

suggests that some of BERT’s success on these items may be attributable to simpler lexical or n-gram

information. In Section 7.3 we take a closer look at some more difficult items that seemingly avoid such

loopholes.

7.2 Completion Sensitivity

Next we test BERT’s ability to prefer expected completions over inappropriate completions of the same

semantic category. We first test this by simply measuring the percentage of items for which BERT assigns a

higher probability to the good completion (e.g., lipstick from Table 1) than to either of the inappropriate

completions (e.g., mascara, bracelet). Table 5 shows the results. We see that BERTBASE assigns the highest

probability to the expected completion in 73.5% of items, whereas BERTLARGE does so for 79.4%—a solid

majority, but with a clear portion of items for which an inappropriate, semantically related target does receive a

higher probability than the appropriate word.

Table 5: 

Percent of CPRAG-102 items with good completion assigned higher probability than bad.

Prefer good

w/ .01 thresh

BERTBASE 

73.5 

44.1 

BERTLARGE 

79.4 

58.8 

We can make our criterion slightly more stringent if we introduce a threshold on the probability difference. The

average cloze difference between good and bad completions is about .74 for the data from which these items

originate, reflecting a very strong human sensitivity to the difference in completion quality. To test the proportion

of items in which BERT assigns more substantially different probabilities, we filter to items for which the good

completion probability is higher by greater than .01—a threshold chosen to be very generous given the

significant average cloze difference. With this threshold, the sensitivity drops noticeably—BERTBASE shows

sensitivity in only 44.1% of items, and BERTLARGE shows sensitivity in only 58.8%. These results tell us that

although the models are able to prefer good completions to same-category bad completions in a majority of

these items, the difference is in many cases very small, suggesting that this sensitivity falls short of what we

see in human cloze responses.

7.3 Qualitative Examination of Predictions

We thus see that the BERT models are able to identify the correct word completions in approximately half of

CPRAG-102 items, and that the models are able to prefer good completions to semantically related

inappropriate completions in a majority of items, though with notably weaker sensitivity than humans. To better






understand the models’ weaknesses, in this section we examine predictions made when the models fail.

Table 6 shows three example items along with the top five predictions of BERTLARGE. In each case, BERT

provides completions that are sensible in the context of the second sentence, but that fail to take into account

the context provided by the first sentence—in particular, the predictions show no evidence of having been able

to infer the relevant information about the situation or object described in the first sentence. For instance, we

see in the first example that BERT has correctly zeroed in on things that one might borrow, but it fails to infer

that the thing to be borrowed is something to be used for cutting lumber. Similarly, BERT’s failure to detect the

snow-shoveling theme of the second item makes for an amusing set of non sequitur completions. Finally, the

third example shows that BERT has identified an animal theme (unsurprising, given the words zoo and

animal), but it is not applying the phrase black and white stripes to identify the appropriate completion of

zebra. Altogether, these examples illustrate that with respect to the target capacities of commonsense

inference and pragmatic reasoning, BERT fails in these more challenging cases.

Table 6: 

BERTLARGE top word predictions for selected CPRAG-102 items.

Context

BERT

Pablo wanted to cut the lumber he had bought to make some shelves. He asked his neighbor if he could borrow her ____ 

car, house,

The snow had piled up on the drive so high that they couldn’t get the car out. When Albert woke up, his father handed him a ____ 

note, letter,

At the zoo, my sister asked if they painted the black and white stripes on the animal. I explained to her that they were natural features of a ____ 

cat, person

8 Results for ROLE-88

Next we turn to the ROLE-88 test of semantic role sensitivity and event knowledge.

8.1 Word Prediction Accuracies

We again define accuracy by presence of a top cloze item within the model’s top k predictions. Table 7 (“Orig”)

shows the accuracies for BERTLARGE and BERTBASE. For k = 1, accuracies are very low, with BERT BASE slightly

outperforming BERTLARGE. When we expand to k = 5, accuracies predictably increase, and BERT LARGE now

outperforms BERTBASE by a healthy margin.

Table 7: 

ROLE-88 word prediction accuracies (with and without sentence perturbations). -Obj = generic object; -Subj =

generic subject; -Both = generic object and subject.

Orig

-Obj

-Sub

-Both

BERTBASE k=1 

14.8 

12.5 

12.5 

9.1 

BERTLARGE k=1 

13.6 

5.7 

6.8 

4.5 

BERTBASE k=5 

27.3 

26.1 

22.7 

18.2 

BERTLARGE k=5 

37.5 

18.2 

21.6 

14.8 

To test the extent to which BERT relies on the individual nouns in the context, we try two different perturbations

of the contexts: removing the information from the object (which customer the waitress ...), and removing the

information from the subject (which customer the waitress...), in each case by replacing the noun with a generic


substitute. We choose one and other as substitutions for the object and subject, respectively.

Table 7 shows the results with each of these perturbations individually and together. We observe several

notable patterns. First, removing either the object (“-Obj”) or the subject (“-Sub”) has relatively little effect on the

accuracy of BERTBASE for either k = 1 or k = 5. This is quite different from what we see with BERT LARGE, the

accuracy of which drops substantially when the object or subject information is removed. These patterns

suggest that BERTBASE is less dependent upon the full detail of the subject-object structure, instead relying

primarily upon one or the other of the participating nouns for its verb predictions. BERTLARGE, on the other hand,

appears to make heavier use of both nouns, such that loss of either one causes non-trivial disruption in the

predictive accuracy.

It should be noted that the items in this set are overall less constraining than those in Section 7—humans

converge less clearly on the same predictions, resulting in lower average cloze values for the best completions.

To investigate the effect of constraint level, we divide items into four bins by top cloze value per sentence.

Table 8 shows the results. With the exception of BERTBASE at k = 1, for which accuracy in all bins is fairly low, it

is clear that the highest cloze bin yields much higher model accuracies than the other three bins, suggesting

some alignment between how constraining contexts are for humans and how constraining they are for BERT.

However, even in the highest cloze bin, when at least a third of humans converge on the same completion, even

BERT LARGE at k = 5 is only correct in half of cases, suggesting substantial room for improvement.

11

Table 8: 

Accuracy of predictions in unperturbed ROLE-88 sentences, binned by max cloze of context.

≤.17

≤.23

≤.33

≤.77

BERTBASE k=1 

12.0 

17.4 

17.4 

11.8 

BERTLARGE k=1 

8.0 

4.3 

17.4 

29.4 

BERTBASE k=5 

24.0 

26.1 

21.7 

41.1 

BERTLARGE k=5 

28.0 

34.8 

39.1 

52.9 

8.2 Completion Sensitivity

Next we test BERT’s sensitivity to role reversals by comparing model probabilities for a given completion (e.g.,

served) in the appropriate versus role-reversed contexts. We again start by testing the percentage of items for

which BERT assigns a higher probability to the appropriate than to the inappropriate completion. As we see in

Table 9, BERTBASE prefers the good continuation in 75% of items, whereas BERTLARGE does so for 86.4%—

comparable to the proportions for CPRAG-102. However, when we apply our threshold of .01 (still generous

given the average cloze difference of .233), sensitivity drops more dramatically than on CPRAG-102, to 31.8%

and 43.2%, respectively.

Table 9: 

Percent of ROLE-88 items with good completion assigned higher probability than role reversal.

Prefer good

w/ .01 thresh

BERTBASE 

75.0 

31.8 

BERTLARGE 

86.4 

43.2 






Overall, these results suggest that BERT is, in a majority of cases of this kind, able to use noun position to

prefer good verb completions to bad—however, it is again less sensitive than humans to these distinctions,

and it fails to match human word predictions on a solid majority of cases. The model’s ability to choose good

completions over role reversals (albeit with weak sensitivity) suggests that the failures on word prediction

accuracy are not due to inability to distinguish word orders, but rather to a weakness in event knowledge or

understanding of semantic role implications.

8.3 Qualitative Examination of Predictions

Table 10 shows predictions of BERTBASE and BERTLARGE for some illustrative examples. For the girl/bear

items, we see that BERT BASE favors continuations like killed and bitten with bear as subject, but also includes

these continuations with girl as subject. BERT LARGE, by contrast, excludes these continuations when girl is the

subject.

Table 10: 

BERTBASE and BERTLARGE top word predictions for selected ROLE-88 sentences.

Context

BERTBASE predictions

BERTLARGE predictions

the camper reported which girl the bear had ____ 

taken, killed, attacked, bitten, picked 

attacked, killed, eaten, taken, targeted

the camper reported which bear the girl had ____ 

taken, killed, fallen, bitten, jumped 

taken, left, entered, found, chosen 

 

the restaurant owner forgot which customer the waitress had ____ 

served, hired, brought, been, taken 

served, been, delivered, mentioned, brought

the restaurant owner forgot which waitress the customer had ____ 

served, been, chosen, ordered, hired 

served, chosen, called, ordered, been 

In the second pair of sentences we see that the models choose served as the top continuation under both word

orders, even though for the second word order this produces an unlikely scenario. In both cases, the model’s

assigned probability for served is much higher for the appropriate word order than the inappropriate one—a

difference of .6 for BERT LARGE and .37 for BERTBASE—but it is noteworthy that no more semantically

appropriate top continuation is identified by either model for which waitress the customer had ____.

As a final note, although the continuations are generally impressively grammatical, we see exceptions in the

second bear/girl sentence— both models produce completions of questionable grammaticality (or at least

questionable use of selection restrictions), with sentences like which bear the girl had fallen from BERT BASE,

and which bear the girl had entered from BERT LARGE.

9 Results for NEG-136

Finally, we turn to the NEG-136 test of negation and category membership.

9.1 Word Prediction Accuracies

We start by testing the ability of BERT to predict correct category continuations for the affirmative contexts in

NEG-136-SIMP. Table 11 shows the accuracy results for these affirmative sentences.

Table 11: 

Accuracy of word predictions in NEG-136-SIMP affirmative sentences.


Accuracy

BERTBASE k = 1 

38.9 

BERTLARGE k = 1 

44.4 

BERTBASE k = 5 

100 

BERTLARGE k = 5 

100 

We see that for k = 5, the correct category is predicted for 100% of affirmative items, suggesting an

impressive ability of both BERT models to associate nouns with their correct immediate hypernyms. We also

see that the accuracy drops substantially when assessed on k = 1. Examination of predictions reveals that

these errors consist exclusively of cases in which BERT completes the sentence with a repetition of the subject

noun, e.g., A daisy is a daisy—which is certainly true, but which is not a likely or informative sentence.

9.2 Completion Sensitivity

We next assess BERT’s sensitivity to the meaning of negation, by measuring the proportion of items in which

the model assigns higher probabilities to true completions than to false ones.

Table 12 shows the results, and the pattern is stark. When the statement is affirmative (A robin is a____), the

models assign higher probability to the true completion in 100% of items. Even with the threshold of .01—which

eliminated many comparisons on CPRAG-102 and ROLE-88—all items pass but one (for BERT BASE),

suggesting a robust preference for the true completions.

Table 12: 

Percent of NEG-136-SIMP items with true completion assigned higher probability than false.

Affirmative

Negative

BERTBASE 

100 

0.0 

BERTLARGE 

100 

0.0 

However, in the negative statements (A robin is not a ____), BERT prefers the true completion in 0% of items,

assigning the higher probability to the false completion in every case. This shows a strong insensitivity to the

meaning of negation, with BERT preferring the category match completion every time, despite its falsity.

9.3 Qualitative Examination of Predictions

Table 13 shows examples of the predictions made by BERTLARGE in positive and negative contexts. We see a

clear illustration of the phenomenon suggested by the earlier results: For affirmative sentences, BERT

produces generally true completions (at least in the top two)—but these completions remain largely unchanged

after negation is added, resulting in many blatantly untrue completions.

Table 13: 

BERTLARGE top word predictions for selected NEG-136-SIMP sentences.


Context

BERTLARGE predictions

A robin is a ____ 

bird, robin, person, hunter, pigeon 

A daisy is a ____ 

daisy, rose, flower, berry, tree 

A hammer is a ____ 

hammer, tool, weapon, nail, device 

A hammer is an ____ 

object, instrument, axe, implement, explosive 

 

A robin is not a ____ 

robin, bird, penguin, man, fly 

A daisy is not a ____ 

daisy, rose, flower, lily, cherry 

A hammer is not a ____ 

hammer, weapon, tool, gun, rock 

A hammer is not an ____ 

object, instrument, axe, animal, artifact 

Another interesting phenomenon that we can observe in Table 13 is BERT’s sensitivity to the nature of the

determiner (a or an) preceding the masked word. This determiner varies depending on whether the upcoming

target begins with a vowel or a consonant (for instance, our mismatched category paired with hammer is

insect) and so the model can potentially use this cue to filter the predictions to those starting with either vowels

or consonants. How effectively does BERT use this cue? The predictions indicate that BERT is for the most

part extremely good at using this cue to limit to words that begin with the right type of letter. There are certain

exceptions (e.g., An ant is not a ant), but these are in the minority.

9.4 Increasing Naturalness

The supplementary NEG-136-NAT items allow us to examine further the model’s handling of negation, with

items designed to test the effect of “naturalness”. When we present BERT with this new set of sentences, the

model does show an apparent change in sensitivity to the negation. BERTBASE assigns true statements higher

probability than false for 75% of natural sentences (“NT”), and BERTLARGE does so for 87.5% of natural

sentences. By contrast, the models each show preference for true statements in only 37.5% of items designed

to be less natural (“LN”). Table 14 shows these sensitivities broken down by affirmative and negative

conditions. Here we see that in the natural sentences, BERT prefers true statements for both affirmative and

negative contexts—by contrast, the less natural sentences show the pattern exhibited on NEG-136-SIMP, in

which BERT prefers true statements in a high proportion of affirmative sentences, and in 0% of negative

sentences, suggesting that once again BERT is defaulting to category matches with the subject.

Table 14: 

Percent of NEG-136-NAT with true continuation given higher probability than false. Aff = affirmative; Neg =

negative; NT = natural; LN = less natural.

Aff. NT

Neg. NT

Aff. LN

Neg. LN

BERTBASE 

62.5 

87.5 

75.0 

0.0 

BERTLARGE 

75.0 

100 

75.0 

0.0 

Table 15 contains BERTLARGE predictions on two pairs of sentences from the “Natural” sentence set. It is worth

noting that even when BERT’s first prediction is appropriate in the context, the top candidates often contradict

each other (e.g., difficult and easy). We also see that even with these natural items, sometimes the negation is


not enough to reverse the top completions, as with the second pair of sentences, in which the fast food dinner

both is and isn’t a romantic first date.

Table 15: 

BERTLARGE top word predictions for selected NEG-136-NAT sentences.

Context

BERTLARGE predictions

Most smokers find that quitting is very ____ 

difficult, easy, effective, dangerous, hard 

Most smokers find that quitting isn’t very ____ 

effective, easy, attractive, difficult, succcessful 

A fast food dinner on a first date is very ____ 

good, nice, common, romantic, attractive 

A fast food dinner on a first date isn’t very ____ 

nice, good, romantic, appealing, exciting 

10 Discussion

Our three diagnostics allow for a clarified picture of the types of information used for predictions by pre-trained

BERT models. On CPRAG-102, we see that both models can predict the best completion approximately half

the time (at k = 5), and that both models rely non-trivially on word order and full sentence context. However,

successful predictions in the face of perturbations also suggest that some of BERT’s success on these items

may exploit loopholes, and when we examine predictions on challenging items, we see clear weaknesses in

the commonsense and pragmatic inferences targeted by this set. Sensitivity tests show that BERT can also

prefer good completions to bad semantically related completions in a majority of items, but many of these

probability differences are very small, suggesting that the model’s sensitivity is much less than that of humans.

On ROLE-88, BERT’s accuracy in matching top human predictions is much lower, with BERTLARGE at only

37.5% accuracy. Perturbations reveal interesting model differences, suggesting that BERTLARGE has more

sensitivity than BERTBASE to the interaction between subject and object nouns. Sensitivity tests show that both

models are typically able to use noun position to prefer good completions to role reversals, but the differences

are on average even smaller than on CPRAG-102, indicating again that model sensitivity to the distinctions is

less than that of humans. The models’ general ability to distinguish role reversals suggests that the low word

prediction accuracies are not due to insensitivity to word order per se, but rather to weaknesses in event

knowledge or understanding of semantic role implications.

Finally, NEG-136 allows us to zero in with particular clarity on a divergence between BERT’s predictive

behavior and what we might expect from a model using all available information about word meaning and

truth/falsity. When presented with simple sentences describing category membership, BERT shows a

complete inability to prefer true over false completions for negative sentences. The model shows an

impressive ability to associate subject nouns with their hypernyms, but when negation reverses the truth of

those hypernyms, BERT continues to predict them nonetheless. By contrast, when presented with sentences

that are more “natural”, BERT does reliably prefer true completions to false, with or without negation. Although

these latter sentences are designed to differ in naturalness, in all likelihood it is not naturalness per se that

drives the model’s relative success on them—but rather a higher frequency of these types of statements in the

training data.

The latter result in particular serves to highlight a stark, but ultimately unsurprising, observation about what

these pre-trained language models bring to the table. Whereas the function of language processing for humans

is to compute meaning and make judgments of truth, language models are trained as predictive models—they

will simply leverage the most reliable cues in order to optimize their predictive capacity. For a phenomenon like


1 

All test sets and experiment code are made available here: https://github.com/aetting/lm-diagnostics.

2 

With one exception, NEG-136, for which we use completion truth, as in the original study.

3 

To highlight this advantage, as a supplement for this test set we provide specific annotations of each item,

indicating the knowledge/reasoning required to make the prediction.

4 

More than 80% of LAMBADA items contain the target word in the preceding context.

5 

For a couple of items, we also replace an inappropriate completion with another inappropriate completion of

the same semantic category to accommodate BERT’s vocabulary.

6 

Our “item” counts use all context/completion pairings.

7 

The one modification that we make to the original subject noun list is a substitution of the word salmon for bass

within the category of fish—because bass created lexical ambiguity that was not interesting for our purposes

here.

8 

https://github.com/huggingface/pytorch-pretrained-BERT.

9

Human cloze probabilities are importantly different from true probabilities over a vocabulary, making these

values not directly comparable. However, cloze provides important indication—the best indication we have—of

how much a context constrains human expectations toward a continuation, so we do at times loosely compare

these two types of values.

10  Note that word accuracies are computed by context, so these accuracies are out of the 34 base contexts.

11 

This analysis is made possible by the Chow et al. (2016) authors’ generous provision of the cloze data for

negation, which is often not conducive to clear predictions, such models may not be equipped to learn the

implications of this word’s meaning.

11 Conclusion

In this paper we have introduced a suite of diagnostic tests for language models to better our understanding of

the linguistic competencies acquired by pre-training via language modeling. We draw our tests from

psycholinguistic studies, allowing us to target a range of linguistic capacities by testing word prediction

accuracies and sensitivity of model probabilities to linguistic distinctions. As a case study, we apply these tests

to analyze strengths and weaknesses of the popular BERT model, finding that it shows sensitivity to role

reversal and same-category distinctions, albeit less than humans, and it succeeds with noun hypernyms, but it

struggles with challenging inferences and role-based event prediction—and it shows clear failures with the

meaning of negation. We make all test sets and experiment code available (see Footnote 1), for further

experiments.

The capacities targeted by these test sets are by no means comprehensive, and future work can build on the

foundation of these datasets to expand to other aspects of language processing. Because these sets are

small, we must also be conservative in the strength of our conclusions—different formulations may yield

different performance, and future work can expand to verify the generality of these results. In parallel, we hope

that the weaknesses highlighted by these diagnostics can help to identify areas of need for establishing robust

and generalizable models for language understanding.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Tal Linzen, Kevin Gimpel, Yoav Goldberg, Marco Baroni, and several anonymous

reviewers for valuable feedback on earlier versions of this paper. We also thank members of the Toyota

Technological Institute at Chicago for useful discussion of these and related issues.

Notes

References

Yossi Adi ,

EinatKermany,

YonatanBelinkov, OferLavi, and YoavGoldberg.

2016. Fine-grained analysis of sentence

embeddings using auxiliary prediction tasks.

International Conference on Learning

Representations.

Google Scholar

 


these items, not originally made public with the items themselves.

Eneko Agirre , MonaDiab, DanielCer, and AitorGonzalez-Agirre. 2012. SemEval-2012 task 6: A pilot on

semantic textual similarity. In Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational

Semantics-Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2:

Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 385–393.

Google Scholar

 

Luisa Bentivogli , RaffaellaBernardi, MarcoMarelli, StefanoMenini, MarcoBaroni, and RobertoZamparelli.

2016. SICK through the SemEval glasses. Lesson learned from the evaluation of compositional

distributional semantic models on full sentences through semantic relatedness and textual entailment.

Language Resources and Evaluation, 50(1):95–124.

Google Scholar

 

Samuel R. Bowman , GaborAngeli, ChristopherPotts, and Christopher D.Manning. 2015. A large annotated

corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical

Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 632–642.

Google Scholar

 

Wing-Yee Chow , CybelleSmith, EllenLau, and ColinPhillips. 2016. A ‘bag-of-arguments’ mechanism for

initial verb predictions. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(5):577–596.

Google Scholar

 

Shammur Absar Chowdhury and RobertoZamparelli. 2018. RNN simulations of grammaticality judgments

on long-distance dependencies. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational

Linguistics, pages 133–144.

Google Scholar

 

Kevin Clark , UrvashiKhandelwal, OmerLevy, and Christopher D.Manning. 2019. What does BERT look at?

An analysis of BERT’s attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341.

Google Scholar

 

Alexis Conneau , GermanKruszewski, GuillaumeLample, LoicBarrault, and MarcoBaroni. 2018. What you

can cram into a single vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In ACL 2018-56th

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2126–2136.

Google Scholar

 

Ido Dagan , OrenGlickman, and BernardoMagnini. 2005. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment

challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges Workshop, pages 177–190. Springer.

Google Scholar

 

Ishita Dasgupta , DemiGuo, AndreasStuhlmüller, Samuel J.Gershman, and Noah D.Goodman. 2018.

Evaluating compositionality in sentence embeddings. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the

Cognitive Science Society.

Google Scholar

 

Jacob Devlin , Ming-WeiChang, KentonLee, and KristinaToutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep

bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North

American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.

Google Scholar

 

Allyson Ettinger , AhmedElgohary, ColinPhillips, and PhilipResnik. 2018. Assessing composition in

sentence vector representations. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational

Linguistics, pages 1790–1801.

Google Scholar

 

Kara D. Federmeier and MartaKutas. 1999. A rose by any other name: Long-term memory structure and

sentence processing. Journal of memory and Language, 41(4):469–495.

Google Scholar

 

Ira Fischler , Paul A.Bloom, Donald G.Childers, Salim E.Roucos, and Nathan W. PerryJr. 1983. Brain


potentials related to stages of sentence verification. Psychophysiology, 20(4):400–409.

Google Scholar

 

Stefan L. Frank , Leun J.Otten, GiuliaGalli, and GabriellaVigliocco. 2013. Word surprisal predicts N400

amplitude during reading. In ACL 2013-51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational

Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference, volume 2, pages 878–883.

Google Scholar

 

Richard Futrell , EthanWilcox, TakashiMorita, PengQian, MiguelBallesteros, and RogerLevy. 2019. Neural

language models as psycholinguistic subjects: Representations of syntactic state. In Proceedings of the

2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:

Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 32–42.

Google Scholar

 

Mario Giulianelli , JackHarding, FlorianMohnert, DieuwkeHupkes, and WillemZuidema. 2018. Under the

hood: Using diagnostic classifiers to investigate and improve how language models track agreement

information. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting

Neural Networks for NLP, pages 240–248.

Google Scholar

 

Yoav Goldberg . 2019. Assessing BERT’s syntactic abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05287.

Google Scholar

 

Kristina Gulordava , PiotrBojanowski, EdouardGrave, TalLinzen, and MarcoBaroni. 2018. Colorless green

recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American

Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1

(Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1195–1205.

Google Scholar

 

Jaap Jumelet and DieuwkeHupkes. 2018. Do language models understand anything? In Proceedings of

the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages

222–231.

Google Scholar

 

Najoung Kim , RomaPatel, AdamPoliak, PatrickXia, AlexWang, TomMcCoy, IanTenney, AlexisRoss,

TalLinzen, Benjamin VanDurme, Samuel R.Bowman, and ElliePavlick. 2019. Probing what different NLP

tasks teach machines about function word comprehension. In Proceedings of the Eighth Joint Conference

on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2019), pages 235–249.

Google Scholar

 

Marta Kutas and Steven A.Hillyard. 1984. Brain potentials during reading reflect word expectancy and

semantic association. Nature, 307(5947):161.

Google Scholar

 

Yair Lakretz , GermánKruszewski, ThéoDesbordes, DieuwkeHupkes, StanislasDehaene, and

MarcoBaroni. 2019. The emergence of number and syntax units in LSTM language models. In Proceedings

of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:

Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 11–20.

Google Scholar

 

Yongjie Lin , YiChern Tan, and RobertFrank. 2019. Open sesame: Getting inside BERT’s linguistic

knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01698.

Google Scholar

 

Tal Linzen , EmmanuelDupoux, and YoavGoldberg. 2016. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn syntax-

sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–535.

Google Scholar

 

Rebecca Marvin and TalLinzen. 2018. Targeted syntactic evaluation of language models. In Proceedings of

the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1192–1202.


Google Scholar

 

R. Thomas McCoy , ElliePavlick, and TalLinzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic

heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for

Computational Linguistics, pages 3428–3448.

Google Scholar

 

Mante S. Nieuwland and Gina R.Kuperberg. 2008. When the truth is not too hard to handle: An event-

related potential study on the pragmatics of negation. Psychological Science, 19(12):1213–1218.

Google Scholar

 

Denis Paperno , GermánKruszewski, AngelikiLazaridou, Ngoc QuanPham, RaffaellaBernardi,

SandroPezzelle, MarcoBaroni, GemmaBoleda, and RaquelFernandez. 2016. The LAMBADA dataset:

Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the

Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 1525–1534.

Google Scholar

 

Matthew Peters , MarkNeumann, MohitIyyer, MattGardner, ChristopherClark, KentonLee, and

LukeZettlemoyer. 2018a. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018

Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human

Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), volume 1, pages 2227–2237.

Google Scholar

 

Matthew Peters , MarkNeumann, LukeZettlemoyer, and Wen-tauYih. 2018b. Dissecting contextual word

embeddings: Architecture and representation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical

Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1499–1509.

Google Scholar

 

Adam Poliak , AparajitaHaldar, RachelRudinger, J.Edward Hu, ElliePavlick, Aaron StevenWhite, and

Benjamin VanDurme. 2018. Collecting diverse natural language inference problems for sentence

representation evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural

Language Processing, pages 67–81.

Google Scholar

 

Ian Tenney , DipanjanDas, and ElliePavlick. 2019a. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1905.05950.

Google Scholar

 

Ian Tenney , PatrickXia, BerlinChen, AlexWang, AdamPoliak, R.Thomas McCoy, NajoungKim, Benjamin

VanDurme, Samuel R.Bowman, DipanjanDas, and ElliePavlick. 2019b. What do you learn from context?

Probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the International

Conference on Learning Representations.

Google Scholar

 

Ashish Vaswani , NoamShazeer, NikiParmar, JakobUszkoreit, LlionJones, Aidan N.Gomez, ŁukaszKaiser,

and IlliaPolosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing

Systems, pages 5998–6008.

Google Scholar

 

Alex Wang , AmanpreetSingh, JulianMichael, FelixHill, OmerLevy, and Samuel R.Bowman. 2018. GLUE: A

multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. Proceedings of the 2018

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, page 353.

Google Scholar

 

Ethan Wilcox , RogerLevy, TakashiMorita, and RichardFutrell. 2018. What do RNN language models learn

about filler–gap dependencies? In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing

and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 211–221.

Google Scholar

 

© 2020 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.


View Metrics

Email Alerts

Article Activity Alert

Closed Issue Alert

Continuous Publishing Added Articles Alert

Latest

Most Read

Most Cited

On the Robustness of Dialogue History

Representation in Conversational Question

Answering: A Comprehensive Study and a New

Prompt-based Method

Why Does Surprisal From Larger Transformer-

Based Language Models Provide a Poorer Fit

to Human Reading Times?

Domain-Specific Word Embeddings with

Structure Prediction

Discontinuous Combinatory Constituency

Parsing

Cited By

Web of Science (134)

Google Scholar

Crossref (67)

Related Articles

Compressing Large-Scale Transformer-Based

Models: A Case Study on BERT

Transactions of the Association for Computational

Linguistics (September,2021)

What Does My QA Model Know? Devising

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use,

distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is

properly cited. For a full description of the license, please visit

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode


A product of The MIT Press

Newsletter Sign Up











MIT Press Direct

Online ISSN: 2307-387X

Controlled Probes Using Expert Knowledge

Transactions of the Association for Computational

Linguistics (September,2020)

A Primer in BERTology: What We Know About

How BERT Works

Transactions of the Association for Computational

Linguistics (January,2021)

oLMpics-On What Language Model Pre-

training Captures

Transactions of the Association for Computational

Linguistics (December,2020)

Related Book Chapters

PSYCHOLINGUISTICS

Structures in the Mind: Essays on Language, Music,

and Cognition in Honor of Ray Jackendoff

Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Issues

Supertagging: Using Complex Lexical Descriptions in

Natural Language Processing

Causal and Diagnostic Reasoning

The Handbook of Rationality

Epidemiology, Classification, and Diagnostic

Issues

Youth Mental Health: A Paradigm for Prevention and

Early Intervention


About MIT Press Direct

Books

Journals

CogNet

Information

For Authors

For Customers

For Librarians

Direct to Open

Open Access

Media Inquiries

Rights and Permissions

For Advertisers

MIT Press

About the MIT Press

The MIT Press Reader

MIT Press Blog

Seasonal Catalogs

MIT Press Home

Give to the MIT Press

Contact Us

FAQ

Direct Service Desk

© 2023 The MIT Press

Terms of Use

 Privacy Statement

 Crossref Member

 COUNTER Member

 Accessibility/VPAT

The MIT Press colophon is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office

