




 



BERT NLP Model Explained for Complete Beginners

BERT NLP Tutorial - A-Z Guide on using state-of-the-art BERT NLP Model for Complete Beginners. 







GET ACCESS TO ALL NLP PROJECTS





VIEW ALL NLP PROJECTS



From sending letters in physical mailboxes to direct messages through your favorite social media application, the

explosion of text has been astronomical. The innovation and development of mobile devices and computers helped

push this increase, and this geometric growth has called for innovative ways to understand and process text. With

machine learning taking some significant leaps in the early 2010s, model creation and prediction have been refined

to mirror human understanding of linguistic expressions.



Written by:

ProjectPro

ProjectPro is the only online platform designed to help professionals gain practical, hands-on experience in big data, data

engineering, data science, and machine learning related technologies. Meet The Author


There has been a significant leap in Natural Language Processing (NLP) in recent years. From BERT ELMO NLP

(Embedding from Language Models) to GPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformer), researchers have tried and

succeeded – to an extent– in making models understand the contextual meaning of words. The creation of BERT

significantly helped NLP scientists to take significant bounds in getting a solution. It is now straightforward to search

for new words and translate between languages to a more suitable one. Bidirectional Encoder Representations from

Transformers(BERT) is one of the most used models in natural language processing in the last decade, all thanks to

BERT NLP, the state of the art language model.

Table of Contents

Introduction to BERT NLP Model

Masked Language Model

BERT NLP Model Architecture Explained in Detail

Applications of BERT NLP

BERT NLP Tutorial: Use of BERT for Sentiment Analysis PyTorch

BERT NLP Project Ideas



Multi-Class Text Classification with Deep Learning using BERT

Downloadable solution code | Explanatory videos | Tech Support



Start Project


BART Vs. BERT NLP

ELMo Vs. BERT NLP

BERT NLP -Learning Takeaways

FAQs on BERT Algorithm

 



Introduction to BERT NLP Model



 

BERT NLP model is a group of Transformers encoders stacked on each other. – BERT is a precise, huge transformer-

masked language model in more technical terms.

Let’s break that statement down:

Models are the output of an algorithm run on data, including the procedures used to make predictions on data. 

A Language model is a numerical model of the probability of words, sentences, or phrases. An example language

model can return is as follows -

The probability of the sentence “Project Pro blog is informative” as output is greater than (&gt;) the

Probability of returning “Informative is Project Pro” as output based on a group of text it has learned from.


Probability simply means which is most likely to happen. For example, in this case, the sentences that have a better

chance of being outputted by the machine output after learning from a group of text.

The quicker the language model learns from the training set to give more accurate predictions, the better the model

is said to be.

Start your journey as a Data Scientist today with solved end-to-end Data Science Projects

Masked Language Model

One of the significant contributions of the BERT NLP contribution paper is masking. Masking involves removing

parts of sentences and having the model fill in the gaps. Masked Language models are becoming very useful

because they are one of the ways contextual embedding is done. One of the drawbacks of traditional word

embedding used in earlier language models is the lack of contextual meaning.

For example, let’s take the following words: 

The speed boat was packed close to the river bank.

Eddy went to the bank to deposit some money and store some jewels.

The word bank means very different things in the above sentences. For the two sentences, the numerical

representation (also known as an embedding) in the traditional language model of the word bank would be the

same. The masked language model helps solve this problem (amongst other things). Later in this BERT NLP tutorial,

a section will highlight how such a model solves this problem.

Transformers

BERT was created on the Transformer architecture, a family of Neural Network architectures. The general idea of

Transformer architecture is based on self-attention, and the paper in which it was proposed is Attention is All You

Need. Self-attention is learning to weigh the relationship between each item or word in an input sequence to other

words in the input sequence.

Consider the sentence:

The animal took too long to cross the road because it was too slow.

If this sentence is passed through an algorithm, what word does it associate “it” with? Is “it” the animal or the road?

While this might be easy for a person to understand, it is difficult for the algorithm to decipher at a glance. Self-

attention ensures that as the model goes through each of the words sequentially in the training data, it looks at the

input text for hints that can assist in encoding the word better.



BERT NLP Model Architecture Explained in Detail

The original Transformer architecture uses the sequence-to-sequence model with an encoder and a decoder. The

encoder turns the input into embedding, and the decoder turns the embedding into string output.


New Projects





Python and MongoDB Project for Beginners with Source Code





View Project





AWS Project to Build and Deploy LSTM Model with Sagemaker





View Project





AWS Project to Build and Deploy LSTM Model with Sagemaker





View Project





Build Serverless Pipeline using AWS CDK and Lambda in Python





View Project





Build an ETL Pipeline with Talend for Export of Data from Cloud





View Project





Multilabel Classification Project for Predicting Shipment Modes


Example of the Original Transformer Architecture

Below is an architecture of a language interpreting transformer architecture.









View Project





Build CI/CD Pipeline for Machine Learning Projects using Jenkins





View Project





Multilabel Classification Project for Predicting Shipment Modes





View Project





A/B Testing Approach for Comparing Performance of ML Models





View Project





AWS CDK Project for Building Real-Time IoT Infrastructure





View Project

View all New Projects




 

The BERT architecture has a different structure. Depending on the use case, it stacks encoders on each other (12 base

or 24 large encoders).



 

The output embeddings will look like this:

[CLS] Her dog is cute. He can be annoying sometimes [SEP]

[CLS] is a token used to represent the classification of specific inputs. You can use this to train models in supervised

learning because you can know the value. An example is using 1 to represent a Home win and 0 to represent an

away win in sports analytics. In the tokens, CLS is represented by 101.

[SEP] is also a unique token used at the end of input. This is used for separating sentences. In the tokens, SEP is

represented by 102. A common way the BERT architecture is also used is to continue the picture above. Here, the

feedback from the classifier goes back into the transformer with updated weights and embeddings.

How to use BERT NLP model?

The BERT Model can be used to change the input to numerical representation (changing text into word

embeddings.)

BERT can be used as an all-purpose pre-trained model  fine-tuned for specific tasks.

All You Need to Know About How BERT Works

BERT NLP Model, at the core, was trained on 2500M words in Wikipedia and 800M from books. BERT was trained on

two modeling methods:

1. MASKED LANGUAGE MODEL (MLM)

2. NEXT SENTENCE PREDICTION (NSP)

These models are also used in practice to fine-tune text when doing natural language processing with BERT.

With these Data Science Projects in Python, your career is bound to reach new heights. Start working

on them today!


Masked Language Model (MLM)

There was a small introduction to the masked language model in the earlier section. In MLM, a certain percentage of

the corpus is hidden or masked and trained. BERT is given a group of words or sentences, and the contextual weights

are maximized to output the sentence on the other side. An incomplete sentence is inputted into BERT, and an output

is received in the easiest terms. 

Let us consider the sample sentence below:

In a year, there are [MASK] months in which [MASK] is the first.

The [MASKS] keywords in the sentence above represent masked words. It is a form of Fill in the gaps (as used in

schools for setting questions used in tests/questionnaires.)

You could guess what goes into the masks gaps in the sentence above to make it a complete one. The first part of the

sentence In a year helps us unlock the sentence, and it becomes very simple to understand from there. The word

month acts like the subject for the last part of the sentence and in which is used to combine the different parts of the

sentence. This was easy to break down because we understand the contextual weights of these words, and most

importantly, we are familiar with the Linguistic expressions of the English Language.

For BERT to complete the sentence, it must read a lot and learn the linguistic patterns of the language very well. BERT

might not know what month, year are --- but it is inevitable that given the large corpus of words to learn the

patterns and context of the words, the answers are likely to be twelve and January.



In practice, 15% of words in a sentence or text corpus are masked to optimize the output result. If there are 20 words

in a sentence, 2/3 can be masked. A masking function at the end of the input (from the picture above) can assist in

creating the masked sentence. Recall that the basis of this model is to help improve the contextual understanding

between words in a sentence.

Next Sentence Prediction (NSP)

While MLM is training the relationship between words, next sentence prediction (NSP) tries to create a long-term

relationship between sentences. The original BERT NLP paper by Google mentioned that the model performed

poorly across each measured metric when NSP was not used. 

What is NSP?

NSP involves giving BERT two sentences, sentence 1 and sentence 2. Then, BERT is asked the question: “HEY BERT,

DOES SENTENCE 1 COME AFTER SENTENCE 2?” --- and BERT replies with isNextSentence or NotNextSentence.

Consider the following three sentences below:

1. Tony drove home after playing football in front of his friend’s house for three hours.

2. In the milky way galaxy, there are eight planets, and Earth is neither the smallest nor the largest.

3. Once home, Tony ate the remaining food he left in the Fridge and fell asleep on the floor.

Which of the sentences would you say followed the other logically? 2 after 1? Probably not. These are the questions

that BERT is supposed to answer.


Sentence 3 comes after 1 because of the contextual follow-up in both sentences. Secondly, an easy takeaway is that

both sentences contain “Tony”. Training BERT with NSP after MLM makes it understandable to a reasonable extent

the linguistic connotations and properties of the language to a good extent.

Applications of BERT NLP

Matching and retrieving documents based on a text or group of words given.

Text Summarization: Summarization of large corpus/documents into smaller chunks to be consumed.

Highlight paragraphs with crucial entry points when a question is asked.

Google Search: Previously, word matching was used when searching words through the internet. If a person

searched “Lagos to Kenya flights,” there was a high chance of showing sites that included “Kenya to Lagos”

flights in the top results. BERT instead uses contextualized matching instead of only word matching.

Sentiment Analysis

Question Answering

Language Translation

Explore Categories

Data Science Projects in Python 

Machine Learning Projects in Python 

Deep Learning Projects

Neural Network Projects 

Tensorflow Projects 

H2O R Projects 

IoT Projects

Keras Deep Learning Projects 

NLP Projects 

Pytorch 

Data Science Projects in Banking and Finance

Data Science Projects in Retail &amp; Ecommerce 

Data Science Projects in Entertainment &amp; Media

Data Science Projects in Telecommunications

Advantages Of Using BERT NLP Model Over Other Models

BERT works well for task-specific models. The state of the art model, BERT, has been trained on a large corpus,

making it easier for smaller, more defined nlp tasks.

Metrics can be fine-tuned and be used immediately.

The accuracy of the model is outstanding because it is frequently updated. You can achieve this with successful

fine-tuning training.

The BERT model is available and pre-trained in more than 100 languages. This can be useful for projects that

are not English-based.

Disadvantages of BERT

Most of the drawbacks of BERT can be linked to its size. While training the data on a large corpus significantly helps

how the computer predicts and learns, there is also another side to it. They include:

The model is large because of the training structure and corpus.

It is slow to train because it is big and there are a lot of weights to update.

It is expensive. It requires more computation because of its size, which comes at a cost.


It is designed to be input into other systems (not a standalone program), and because of that, it has to be fine-

tuned for downstream tasks, which can be fussy.

Common Mistakes to Avoid When Working with BERT NLP Model

These are some common mistakes NLP engineers or data scientists make when using BERT -

Type of Tokenizer Used: The WordPiece tokenizer must be used when using BERT. You have to use the same

kind of tokenizer originally used to train BERT to train your model.

Training BERT Model from Scratch. Use pre-trained models instead of training new models when using BERT.

This is very expensive and it is not advisable to do so.

Task Specific Problems. For some tasks, when fine-tuning, the results from the runs will not converge (also

known as degeneration). This usually depends on the tasks, and it is advised to be aggressive with early

stopping when fine-tuning it yourself.

BERT NLP Tutorial: Use of BERT for Sentiment Analysis PyTorch



 

Sentiment Analysis is a technique in natural language processing used to determine the sentiment of a corpus of

words. It is used to determine a group of words' degree of positivity or negativity. Sentiment Analysis finds huge

applications in analyzing reviews, ratings, or feedback. 

Businesses and organizations use sentiment analysis to analyze their products or services on the go. This feedback

helps the organization know areas where to improve and enlightens future audiences and users of products of what

to expect. This also is a good indication if an interested individual buys the product or service. The innovation and

improvement of language models in recent years have ensured that the management of companies usually asks for

this kind of analysis. Almost all profitable businesses have a feedback platform for their customers.

We will explore a short example of BERT for sentiment analysis to understand how BERT is used in practice. 

Setting up the Environment

A good practice is setting up a new Virtual environment for projects, especially when installing new dependencies on

your computer. This is to ensure that your core libraries are not affected if an installation issue needs a revert.

Jupyter notebook will be used for this project. For anaconda, you can create a virtual environment with the following

command -

conda create --name nlp_bert

Here, for easy recall, nlp_bert is used as the name. You can replace it with any name you are more comfortable with.

Unlock the ProjectPro Learning Experience for FREE

Installing Required Dependencies


PyTorch

On the PyTorch website, there are some selections to pick depending on the operating system and installation

method that will be used:



 

The CUDA option is for computers with a graphics card (for example,  NVidia graphics card), so CPU remains the

safest option. Most data scientists use anaconda so the conda option will be  selected.

Transformers

For this NLP project example, we will use the Huggingface pre-trained BERT model will be used. The code for

installing the dependency is:

conda install -c huggingface transformers

Recall that one of the points above (under the standard errors section) is creating a BERT model from scratch.

Huggingface has developed an open-source BERT model that we can use for this example.

Importing Required Dependencies

import torch

from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSequenceClassification

Instantiating the Model

You will create the Tokenzier in this code section and the model loaded from Huggingface. The first time the model is

loaded, it will be downloaded into your computer and might take some time.



 

The links in the brackets are the ending section to the website URL, effectively acting as an API (Application

Programming Interface).



Calculating the Sentiment

We will calculate the Sentiment for three different sentences to explain how it works. It ranges from 1 to 5 where 1 is


negative and 5 is positive. 



Let’s take a look at the sentiments of the sentences in the picture that is shown above:

1. The movie is great. I would recommend it to anyone.

2. The movie is just there. Could have been better.

3. I wasted my time watching that movie. It was so absolutely terrible

For the first sentence, the token is created by tokenizing the input text. Return sensors is set to “pt” which means

PyTorch. Our tokens are in a list of lists, so indexing returns the list with the sentence tokens.



The tokenizer.decode() function above is not necessary for sentiment analysis, and it is to highlight the special tokens

that were explained earlier in the first section. [CLS] and [SEP] are special characters representing classification and

sentence separator, respectively.



 

The logits with the highest value are where the sentiment analytical value will be from. Logits is the final layer in a

neural network that returns the raw values for the prediction. Logit is the tensor which the argmax function is used

to return the predicted class.



 


The rating for the sentence “The movie is great. I would recommend it to anyone.” is a semantic rating of 5, meaning

very positive. 

Get confident to build end-to-end projects.

Access to a curated library of 250+ end-to-end industry projects with solution code, videos

and tech support.





Request a demo

At a glance, the semantic score can be easily calculated because the model being used has been pre-trained using

the methods explained in earlier sections. Depending on the project and use case, you can fine-tune the parameters

to match requirements. 

To calculate the sentiments for the three sample reviews. You will create a function as shown below- 



 

For each of the sentences, the semantic score matches our sentences logically. “The movie is great. I would

recommend it” is a very positive review and as such has the highest positive score, which is 5.

You can take the next step by web scraping numerous reviews or feedbacks from a product platform and generating

a semantic score of the overall feedback of the product or service.

BERT NLP Project Ideas

1. Fake News Detection

In this digital era, the thirst of curiosity to know about almost anything is quickly fulfilled by a few touches and


swipes on a screen. But with this boon, there is a bane of spreading of incorrect information. Use the web scraping

method to source data and train the BERT algorithm to deduce whether or not the input text represents factually

correct information.

2. Multi-Class Text Classification

In this project, you will learn how to formulate a business problem into a data science problem. You will learn about

the architecture of the BERT model and preparing data for parsing it through the model. This project will guide you

through the solution of a multi-class text classification problem by training the pre-trained BERT model with the help

of CUDA or CPU.

Source Code: NLP Project for Multi-Class Text Classification using BERT Model 

3. Human Emotion Identification

In this project, you will learn about transformer-based models, RoBERTa and XLNet. The goal is to analyze the textual

data and label the data with one of the six emotions- anger, fear, joy, love, sadness, and surprise. You will learn how

to implement NLP methods like the Bag of Words model. TF-IDF, Word2vec embeddings, etc. The project solution

will give you an in-depth understanding of the BERT architecture.

Source Code: Text Classification with Transformers-RoBERTa and XLNet Model

4. Sentiment Analysis

Analyzing customers’ feedback is key to the growth of any business. In this BERT NLP Github project, you will learn

how to analyze the sentiments of customers by passing their feedback to the BERT model. This project will guide you

about NLP methods such as Tokenization and encoding textual data. You will also learn how to analyze model

performance using metrics like F1-Score, accuracy, etc.

GitHub Repository: Sentiment Analysis with Deep Learning using BERT by Dhruv Aggarwal 

BART Vs. BERT NLP

When reading about the BERT algorithm, you are likely to come across the BART model, and you must understand

the difference between the two models so that you do not get confused between them.

BERT

BART

BERT: Bidirectional Encoder

Representations from Transformers

BART: Bidirectional Auto-Regressive Transformers

BERT architecture consists of a

bidirectional encoder.

BART architecture consists of a combination of a bidirectional

encoder and an autoregressive decoder.

It is suited for text classification tasks. It is suited for text-generation tasks.

 

Get FREE Access to Data Analytics Example Codes for Data Cleaning, Data Munging, and Data

Visualization

ELMo Vs. BERT NLP

Another algorithm that is widely compared to BERT is ELMO. Let us try to understand how these two are different

from each other.

ELMo

BERT


ELMo: Embeddings from language model BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations from

Transformers

It uses right-to-left and left-to-right

LSTMs.

It is deeply bidirectional because of the underlying masked

language modeling technique on which it is built.

The input to this model is characters and

not words.

It tokenizes words into sub-words, which serve as input to

the model.

The core of this model is based on Long

Short Term Memory Networks (LSTMs).

The core of the BERT model is based on the Transformers

model.

BERT NLP -Learning Takeaways

Contextual understanding of sentences has created significant bounds in natural language processing. The

continuous innovation around this subject will get even more precise in the future. These improvements can all be

traced back to attention – Self-attention. 

This article simplifies BERT for easy understanding. We started with the sentence–BERT is a precise, huge, masked

language model. Breaking down the technical terms used in the sentence has helped give a brief overview of what

the model is about and what it tries to achieve. How it is created gives an insight into what happens behind the

scenes, and sentiment analysis is an example of how it is used in practice.

Most Watched Projects





Linear Regression Model Project in Python for Beginners Part 1





View Project





Hands-On Real Time PySpark Project for Beginners





View Project





Databricks Real-Time Streaming with Event Hubs and Snowflake





View Project





Build an End-to-End AWS SageMaker Classification Model


FAQs on BERT Algorithm

What is BERT used for in NLP?

BERT or Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers are used for completing various NLP tasks such as

Sentiment Analysis, language translation, etc.

Is BERT an NLP model?

BERT stands for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers. It is a commonly used machine learning

model for applications in NLP.

Is BERT a supervised or unsupervised learning algorithm?

Neither BERT is a supervised learning nor an unsupervised learning algorithm. Rather, BERT is a self-supervised

learning algorithm.

PREVIOUS

NEXT









View Project





Build an AWS ETL Data Pipeline in Python on YouTube Data





View Project



Trending Project

Categories

Machine Learning Projects

Data Science Projects

Deep Learning Projects

Big Data Projects

View all Most Watched Projects




Apache Hadoop Projects

Apache Spark Projects

Show more

Trending Projects

Walmart Sales Forecasting Data

Science Project

BigMart Sales Prediction ML Project

Music Recommender System

Project

Credit Card Fraud Detection Using

Machine Learning

Resume Parser Python Project for

Data Science

Time Series Forecasting Projects

Show more

Trending Blogs

Machine Learning Projects for

Beginners with Source Code

Data Science Projects for Beginners

with Source Code

Big Data Projects for Beginners with

Source Code

IoT Projects for Beginners with

Source Code

Data Analyst vs Data Scientist

Data Science Interview Questions

and Answers

Show more

Trending Recipes

Search for a Value in Pandas

DataFrame

Pandas Create New Column based

on Multiple Condition

LSTM vs GRU

Plot ROC Curve in Python

Python Upload File to Google Drive




Optimize Logistic Regression Hyper

Parameters

Show more

Trending Tutorials

PCA in Machine Learning Tutorial

PySpark Tutorial

Hive Commands Tutorial

MapReduce in Hadoop Tutorial

Apache Hive Tutorial -Tables

Linear Regression Tutorial

Show more

ProjectPro

© 2023 Iconiq Inc.

About us

Contact us

Privacy policy

User policy

Write for ProjectPro

