
What Is Repositioning? – Meaning, Reasons, &amp; Example

July 9, 2020 by Aashish Pahwa |  

repositioning

What if I told you that Java failed during its initial days?

The language was originally designed for interactive television but was too advanced for the digital

cable television industry in 1991.

Its positioning was faulty. The founders realised it quite early and ‘repositioned’ the brand to serve

web browsers in 1996, and the rest is history.

This is just one example of repositioning. The list is never ending –

Colgate started off by selling soap, candles, and starch. It later repositioned itself as a

toothpaste brand.

Nintendo was started as a playing card company in 1889 before becoming the video game

pioneer as we know it today.

And of course, Google started off as just a search engine before it repositioned itself as an

internet giant.

So, what exactly is repositioning and why do companies reposition themselves? Well, here’s a

guide to explain everything.



Contents [ show ]

What Is Repositioning?

Repositioning refers to the process of altering the existing space a brand occupies in the brains of

Menu

Feedough

Reader Disclosure


the customers.

In simple terms, it is a process of changing how the target market perceives the brand or its offering

with respect to its –

Features, and

Competitors.

With repositioning, the business tries to change the way the customer view the brand without always

altering the bond between the customer and the business. It involves changing the brand’s promise

and personality with an updated or refreshed –

Marketing mix,

Brand identity,

Target customer, and

Brand essence.

Reasons For Repositioning

A brand would want to change the customer perception because of innumerable industry related,

brand related, future related, competition related, and customer related reasons. Some of them are

–

Increased Competition

Often times, increased competition in the market results in the lack of perceived differentiation of

the brand compared to its competitors. This requires the brand to reposition itself in order to

highlight its particular advantages.

Faulty Existing Positioning

There are cases when a brand is –

Under-positioned: The existing positioning is too weak or vague to make customers

associate emotions, traits, feelings, and sentiments with it.

Over-positioned: The existing positioning is too narrowly defined which restricts its growth.

Either condition is bad for the brand and requires it to reposition itself.

Evolved Products


When the business invests in a substantial product improvement, it is likely to offer additional

benefits and cater to a wide audience. This often requires the brand to reposition itself.

Changes In Macro Environment

The macro environment of the business includes factors that are not in its hands, like –

Industry level changes,

Changes in government policies,

Economic conditions,

Technological advances, etc.

These changes often force the business to reposition its brand(s).

Failed Extensions

Brand extension (also called brand stretching) is a marketing strategy where the company makes

use of its existing established brand name for a new product or a new product category.

Sometimes, these brand extensions fail, affecting the existing brand image negatively. This requires

the brand to reposition itself to change the perception.

Future Plans

The future plans of the business also act as triggers to make it reposition its brand.

Acquisition Plans: The brand has plans to acquire and expand, or being acquired by a

bigger business.

Opportunity Capitalisation: The brand sees an opportunity that can be more profitable in

future.

Threat Aversion: The brand is expecting some threats in the future that require it to change

its positioning strategy.

Importance Of Repositioning

Survival of a brand with a faulty positioning is hard, for a simple reason that the target customers are

not able to associate emotions, traits, feelings, and sentiments with a mispositioned brand. This

makes repositioning really important.

Moreover, with time, as the brand grows, as the industry grows, and as the competition grows,


repositioning becomes more important as it helps the brand occupy a different (and more profitable)

place in the minds of the customers.

It refreshes the customers’ perception of the brand and gives the brand almost a new start in the

market.

Rebranding And Repositioning

Rebranding and repositioning, even though mistaken to be the same, are considerably different

processes.

Rebranding is just changing and updating the brand identity elements like brand name, logo, tagline,

messaging, and associations.

Repositioning, however, requires the brand to update its promise, personality, and its marketing mix.

It involves changing everything required to alter the existing perception of the brand in the minds of

the customers.

If we consider a brand to be a person, rebranding is when the brand loses its weight, changes its

hairstyle, updates its wardrobe, and even changes its name. Repositioning, however, is when the

brands changes its values, attitude, personality, behaviour or anything that’s required to change the

current perception of the brand. Repositioning can also involve the change of brand identity to

support the new perception. 

Repositioning Examples

Repositioning isn’t a new practice. It has been in existence since the 18  century when King

Friedrich II repositioned potatoes to be daily food.

Since then innumerable companies have repositioned themselves. Here are some notable

examples –  

McDonald’s Repositioning

Ever since it was launched, McDonald’s positioned itself as a family-friendly low-cost restaurant. Till

the early 2010s, the company lacked digital innovation and was known for applying the one-size-fits-

all approach to all its outlets. It also received a lot of criticism for having had a menu that had a bad

impact on the body. And the brand also had bad relations with its employees.

This made the brand to be less trusted and made the customers try other alternatives.

th


This made McDonald’s draft a strategy to reposition itself. This is how it went –

The company repositioned itself as a modern, progressive burger company and changed its

philosophy from “billions served” to “billions heard.”

It included various digital kiosks within the stores and unveiled a program called “Create your

Taste” where customers could build their own burgers using digital kiosks.

It even launched a mobile application to enhance the digital customer experience.

All this was supported with aggressive marketing to target the ‘younger audience’.

The company also executed a repositioning strategy in the late 2010s where it launched a

completely new format for McDonald’s franchises. This format is called the “to-go” location, which is

a stripped-down version of McDonald’s dedicated to takeout orders. This new format doesn’t

include tables and chairs but is full of touch screens for customers to order. And since the ordering

is done only digitally, all of the human employees work on fulfilling the orders, which results in faster

order processing. Even the menu is streamlined only favourite items like fries, chicken nuggets and

the classic Big Mac.

Starbucks Repositioning

Starbucks failed when it tried to penetrate the coffee industry in Australia in the early 2000s. The

company launched its first store in 2000 and tried to penetrate by taking its existing brand promise

of ‘coffee as a service’ to an existing matured market.

Starbucks didn’t fit the Australian’s tastes. The company charged more than the local cafes and

served sweeter coffee options than the locals preferred.

As a result, the company saw its losses go up to $105 million in the first seven years and had to

close 70 percent of its underperforming locations by 2008.

Here’s why it didn’t work out for the brand –

The market was already saturated and the company offered nothing new – in-store

furnishings, magazines, music and wi-fi were already provided by the other local brands.

The actual brand value proposition was built on friendliness but the company spaced away

from it by focusing more on generating steady customer turnover. The employees used

automatic machines and were so busy with work that they hardly conversed with the

customers or provided them with a different experience.

And Starbucks followed the same menu and strategies in Australia that it followed for other










countries, ignoring what actually was desired in the market. It even followed its no advertising

strategy which backfired.

This called for repositioning. So in 2014, when the Withers family (who own the 7-Eleven

stores) bought the Australian license for Starbucks, they repositioned the brand to be more

‘Australian’. The menu was changed according to the Australian tastes, the coffee was made more

of an experience, and stores were reopened strategically with the focus shifted to cater to the tourist

population than the locals.

Go On, Tell Us What You Think!

Did we miss something? Come on! Tell us what you think about our article on repositioning in the

comments section.

Related Posts:



The First Successful Repositioning In History



Product-Market Fit: What It Is &amp; Why Is It Important?



Why Did Nokia Fail?





Aashish Pahwa

A startup consultant, digital marketer, traveller, and philomath. Aashish has worked with over 20 startups and

successfully helped them ideate, raise money, and succeed. When not working, he can be found hiking, camping, and

stargazing.

Follow Author:


















What Is Television Advertising? – Importance, Types,…



Choosing The Right Business Model For Your Startup



Marketing Campaign - Meaning, Types, &amp; Examples



What Is Product Mix? Explanation With Examples



The History of Nokia



Why Brands Fail? Reasons for Brand Failure



What Is Marketing Collateral? - Types &amp; Examples

Marketing Essentials












Name *

Email *



Post Comment

About Feedough

Feedough is the one-stop resource for everything related to startups. Our philosophy is to

research, curate, and provide the best startup feeds and resources to help you succeed in your

venture. We are currently ranked as the 13th best startup website in the world and are paving our

way to the top.

What are you waiting for? Start your search now on this startup guide.

Search For An Article



Search …

 



Navigate

Learn Startups

Learn Marketing

Learn Sales

Learn Development

Learn Crypto

Learn Management

Learn Branding

Learn Product Management


Disclaimer

We spend a lot of time researching and writing our articles and strive to provide accurate, up-to-

date content. However, our research is meant to aid your own, and we are not acting as licensed

professionals. We recommend that you use your own judgement and consult with your own

consultant, lawyer, accountant, or other licensed professional for relevant business decisions.

The site may also contain links to affiliate websites, and we receive an affiliate commission for

any purchases made by you on the affiliate website using such links.

Click here to see our full disclaimer.

Product or company names, logos, and trademarks referred to on this site belong to their

respective owners.

Learn Project Management

Business Strategies Studies

Brand Statistics Studies

Brand History Studies

Brand Failure Studies

Business Models Studies

Brand Competitors Studies

Startup Guides

Marketing &amp; Sales Guides

Hustle Guides

Human Resource Guides

How To Guides

Digital Marketing Guides

Business Guides

Pitch Deck Guide

Generational Marketing Guide

Startup Naming Guide

Startup Funding Guide


Feedough © 2016-22. All Rights Reserved.



About us

Contact us

Disclaimer

Cookie Policy

Privacy Policy

Terms of Service

Acknowledgments

Advertising Kit

a

d

k

h

J

