


Library / G.R. Little Library / Critical Thinking &amp; Academic Research / Welcome

Critical Thinking &amp; Academic Research

This guide is created to aid you in your development of critical thinking skills and in your ability to conduct research using library resources.

Welcome

A- First Steps to Research Process

B- Evaluating Resources Critically

C- Utilizing Resources &amp; Incorporate Information in Your Work

Resources-Critical Thinking

Contact Librarian







Skip to Main Content






Nurhak Tuncer

Email Me

Contact:

Available via Zoom for virtual consultations. Email me to set up an appointment please.

ntuncerbayramli@ecsu.edu

Pronouns: she/her/hers

Location: Fine Arts Center, 2nd Floor, Room 234

252.335.3632



Subjects:

Art, Biology, Chemistry, Humanities, Library Science, Music

Critical Thinking Defined

Critical Thinking as Defined by the National Council for Excellence in Critical Thinking, 1987

Michael Scriven &amp; Richard Paul's statement was presented at the 8th Annual International Conference on Critical Thinking and Education Reform,

Summer 1987.

Critical thinking is the intellectually disciplined process of actively and skillfully conceptualizing, applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating

information gathered from, or generated by, observation, experience, reflection, reasoning, or communication, as a guide to belief and action. Its

exemplary form is based on universal intellectual values that transcend subject matter divisions: clarity, accuracy, precision, consistency, relevance,

sound evidence, good reasons, depth, breadth, and fairness.

 

Source: Defining Critical Thinking. The Foundation for Critical Thinking. Web. http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/defining-critical-thinking/766


Overview

This guide is created to aid you in your development of critical thinking skills and in your ability to conduct research using library

resources. We are here to help you achieve your academic career goals and have a successful research journey by providing you with the

necessary tools. Research starts at the library and contacting your librarians.

This guide is designed in three sections:

A- Steps to Research Process (investigate, understand the types of information, when to use, which discipline, access and

locate information)

B- Evaluating Resources Critically (Currency, Relevancy, Authority, Accuracy, and Purpose (CRAAP) test)

C- Utilizing Resources Using Critical Thinking Strategies (What to cite, when to cite, and how to cite while blending critical

thinking skills)




Last Updated: Apr 19, 2023 4:10 PM

URL: https://libguides.ecsu.edu/critical

 Print Page

Login to LibApps

Report a problem

Critical Thinking &amp; Academic Research

Academic research focuses on the creation of new concepts when the researcher seeks relevant information in articles, books, and other

resources using critical thinking skills. Thus, librarians play an essential role in assisting researchers in sharpening their critical thinking

skills by showing them how to locate, analyze, evaluate, and incorporate these academic resources into their research as part of the

information literacy concept. 



The image is from https://newlondon-wi.libguides.com/c.php?g=354670




G.R. Little Library

Elizabeth City State University



 



