


 »  Staff home »

» Research impact » What is research impact?



Search

A-Z |

Departments | Contacts | Map

Current staff

...



What is research impact?

What is research impact?

Research impact is the effect research has beyond academia. The York Research Impact Statement (PDF 



, 286kb) describes

research impact as “…when the knowledge generated by our research contributes to, benefits and influences society, culture,

our environment and the economy”. More detailed direction and objectives for research impact at York are set out in York's

Strategic Framework for Impact (staff only)

The type of impact your research might have is specific to each project and therefore, like research, impact is wide ranging and

varied. Some of the key areas of research impact include;

Cultural impact

Economic impact

Environmental impact

Social impact 

Impact on health and wellbeing

Policy influence and change

Legal impact

Technological developments

This small series of infographics will give you some more ideas about what impact is and how it is defined:

What is impact? An overview for those new to all this: What is research impact? (PDF 



, 221kb)

Some terminology from different organisations: Research Impact Infographic (PDF 



, 158kb)

More detailed definitions of impact and related terms: Impact definitions infographic (PDF 



, 132kb)

 

What isn’t impact?

What isn’t impact?

It can sometimes be hard to distinguish the difference between the routes to research impact (often known as knowledge

exchange, engagement, or impact activities) and the impact itself. You may find it helpful to consider impact as something that

other people or institutions gain or do - it is not something that you as a researcher can ‘do’ rather you can encourage it

Email

Calendar

Google Drive

Yorkshare VLE

Library catalogue

e:Vision

Pure

MyView

Skip to Content

Accessibility statement


Sitemap



through impact activities. For example: giving evidence to a select committee, working with a business or contributing to an

exhibition in a museum is not impact. It would become impact if the people or organisation involved somehow do, experience

or understand differently as a result of their interaction with the research.   

Examples of impact - More examples of York's research impact can be seen in REF 2014 impact case study database,

which contains the impact case studies submitted to the last REF.













IT and online services

Learning and teaching

Learning Design and Technology

Quality assurance

Teaching development

Student learning support

Initiatives and funding

Contacts and committees

Administrative services

















Research

External funding, grants and contracts

Internal funding (staff access only)

PURE

Training and forums

Research governance

Supporting students

Working at York

Finance

Payroll

Finance systems

Claiming expenses







Leisure and culture

Support, health and wellbeing

Support for disabled staff

Policies and strategies

External relations

Philanthropic partnerships and alumni

Student recruitment and admissions (staff access only)




 



© University of York 

Legal statements | Privacy | Cookies | Accessibility

Modify |

By continuing to use the site we assume you're happy with how we use cookies.

×

