
UW–MADISON

This page lists some of the stages involved in writing a library-based research paper.

Although this list suggests that there is a simple, linear process to writing such a paper, the actual process of

writing a research paper is often a messy and recursive one, so please use this outline as a flexible guide.

Discovering, Narrowing, and Focusing a Researchable Topic

Try to find a topic that truly interests you

Try writing your way to a topic

Talk with your course instructor and classmates about your topic

Pose your topic as a question to be answered or a problem to be solved

Finding, Selecting, and Reading Sources

You will need to look at the following types of sources:

library catalog, periodical indexes, bibliographies, suggestions from your instructor

primary vs. secondary sources

journals, books, other documents

Grouping, Sequencing, and Documenting Information

The following systems will help keep you organized:

a system for noting sources on bibliography cards

a system for organizing material according to its relative importance

a system for taking notes

Writing an Outline and a Prospectus for Yourself

Consider the following questions:



The Writing Center

University of Wisconsin – Madison

HomeUW-Madison Writer’s HandbookAcademic and Professional WritingWriting a Research Paper

Writing a Research Paper


What is the topic?

Why is it significant?

What background material is relevant?

What is my thesis or purpose statement?

What organizational plan will best support my purpose?

Writing the Introduction

In the introduction you will need to do the following things:

present relevant background or contextual material

define terms or concepts when necessary

explain the focus of the paper and your specific purpose

reveal your plan of organization

Writing the Body

Use your outline and prospectus as flexible guides

Build your essay around points you want to make (i.e., don’t let your sources organize your paper)

Integrate your sources into your discussion

Summarize, analyze, explain, and evaluate published work rather than merely reporting it

Move up and down the “ladder of abstraction” from generalization to varying levels of detail back to

generalization

Writing the Conclusion

If the argument or point of your paper is complex, you may need to summarize the argument for your

reader.

If prior to your conclusion you have not yet explained the significance of your findings or if you are

proceeding inductively, use the end of your paper to add your points up, to explain their significance.

Move from a detailed to a general level of consideration that returns the topic to the context provided by

the introduction.

Perhaps suggest what about this topic needs further research.

Revising the Final Draft

Check overall organization: logical flow of introduction, coherence and depth of discussion in body,

effectiveness of conclusion.

Paragraph level concerns: topic sentences, sequence of ideas within paragraphs, use of details to

support generalizations, summary sentences where necessary, use of transitions within and between

paragraphs.


Sentence level concerns: sentence structure, word choices, punctuation, spelling.

Documentation: consistent use of one system, citation of all material not considered common knowledge,

appropriate use of endnotes or footnotes, accuracy of list of works cited.



Academic and Professional Writing

Expand all

Collapse all

CONTACT US

Writing Center

6171 Helen C White Hall

600 North Park Street, Madison, WI 53706

Email: wcenter@writing.wisc.edu

Phone: 608-263-1992

Analysis Papers

Grant Proposals

Job Materials and Application Essays

Proposals and Dissertations

Research Papers

Thank-You Notes

Reviews

Scientific Reports

Writing for the Web


Website feedback, questions or accessibility issues: wcenter@writing.wisc.edu.

Learn more about accessibility at UW–Madison.

This site was built using the UW Theme | Privacy Notice | © 2023 Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System.

Cookie Notice

We use cookies on this site. By continuing to browse without changing your browser settings to block or delete cookies, you

agree to the UW–Madison Privacy Notice.

ACCEPT COOKIE NOTICE

