
How to do good research

by Gregor v. Bochmann, School of Information Technology and Engineering (SITE), University of Ottawa

(This text was prepared in October 2009 at the Hunan University of Science and Technology in Xiangtan, China)

Criteria for funding research in Canada: the most important source of funding for university-based research in computer science is the Natural

Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)

Discovery Program (unconstrained basic and applied research) – relatively small amounts of money

Good researcher (past performance)

Good research proposal (innovative, relevant to current state of the art in theory or practice, well explained and justified)

Good opportunity for training of researchers at the Master, PhD and post-doctoral levels

Collaborative research (with industry involvement) – relatively large amounts of money

Additional criteria: potential application in the industrial context

Evidence of industrial interest: (1) letters of support explaining relevance; (2) industrial funding: for many programs, the budget is

based on matching industry funds

How to do good research : Important points (overview)

1. Choose an interesting area for research

2. Identify an interesting research topic (a problem for which there is no good solution)

3. Have some good idea how to improve the state of the art

4. Show that your idea works: e.g.

Apply it to some examples (realistic case studies, if possible)

Prove some properties of your approach (logical properties or analytical performance predictions) and show that it is better than the

current state of the art

Do simulation studies (e.g. for performance) and show that your approach  is better than the current state of the art

Build a software tool that supports your approach

5. Do a systematic comparison with other approaches to the same problem and discuss advantages AND disadvantages of your approach

6. Write up your results in some papers which make these results accessible to the interested expert.

How to do good research : more details

1. Choose an interesting area for research

Relevance for practical applications

Area that has not yet been explored thoroughly

Area that corresponds to your past experience (unless you want to change fields)

2. Identify an interesting research topic (a problem for which there is no good solution)

You must be familiar in general with your research area. Depending on your past experience, this may require much reading. Read

surveys and overview articles.

In order to identify your research topic, you have to look around (within the research area) to find a problem that has not yet been

solved, or for which the existing solutions could be improved. For this purpose, you have to read more detailed papers. When you

think, you have found a good research topic, you have to study all literature related to the problem at hand. This requires much

readings. Look in good journals (e.g. ACM or IEEE Transactions) and good conferences (ACM and IFIP conferences are often

better than IEEE conferences – check the acceptance rate of conferences – specialized conferences usually have more interesting

papers than general-purpose conferences).

Google is a very interesting search tool, in particular, if you know the title of the paper you are looking for. I think it is better not to

rely simply on Google to do your literature search. Better: identify the relevant GOOD journals and conferences in the area and look

through the published articles – read the abstract of those that have an interesting title in relation to your interest – read the whole

article superficially if the abstract is promising -  read the article again (thoroughly) if you are interested in the details.

Talk to other people knowledgeable in your research area about your readings and your questions; contact the author of a paper to

get a copy, or if you have questions after reading the paper in detail.

You may find that the problem that you had chosen is already mostly solved. Maybe it would be better for you to find another topic.

Go on reading.

In the process of doing this, you may find that there is no good survey paper on the area yet. You may write such a paper.

3. Have some good idea how to improve the state of the art

Such a “good idea” comes mostly during the reading of some interesting paper, or by noting that for a given situation described in one

paper, an approach presented in another paper may be useful. Most of the time, these “good ideas” do not lead to big results, but

only to small improvements. Sometimes, during working on such small improvements, some further “good idea” may appear which

may lead to more important “improvements”. Then you have to show that your idea “works” (see below).

There is no recipee that always leads to a "good idea". You have to be inventive. It also helps to have a critical attitude towards the

paper you are reading. Maybe it is not as simple as they say ??

4. Show that your idea works: e.g.

Apply it to some examples (realistic case studies, if possible)

In order to check whether a “new idea” works, you should always try it out with some small examples first, and then some


more complex one – if possible an example that covers all aspects of the problem.

To convince yourself and others that your approach is interesting in practice, it is very useful to apply it to some realistic case

study (this may be a prototype implementation or an extensive simulation study)

Prove some properties of your approach (logical properties or analytical performance predictions) and show that it is better than the

current state of the art

Do simulation studies (e.g. for performance) and show that your approach  is better than the current state of the art

Build a software tool that supports your approach

Which of the above three points is more relevant for showing that your idea works depends on the nature of your problem. Often all

of these points may be pursued in parallel.

5. Do a systematic comparison with other approaches to the same problem and discuss advantages AND disadvantages of your approach

The research work under point (4) should be pursued such that at the end a systematic comparison with all other known approaches

can be established. Again, a prerequisite is extensive reading in order to be familiar with the existing literature on the topic.

6. Write up your results in some papers which make these results accessible to the interested expert.

How to write a good research paper is addressed below.

You may ask the question: Is the number of papers published important for your career ? - In Canada, it is generally considered that

it is better to have a few papers in respected journals and conferences than to have many papers in journals and conferences of lower

quality. There is no serious research organization that simply counts the number of papers published.

How to write a good research paper

There are a number of interesting articles on the Internet about this topic. I made copies of those articles I found most interesting (among those that

I found with Google).

Tips for writing technical papers (by Jennifer Widom) – original :  Good remarks about the different parts that should be included in a paper.

Writing technical articles (by Henning Schulzrinne) – original :  This is a good overview of the important points. It also contains many links to

related documents (in particular, see the list at the end).

How to write a paper (by Mike Ashby) – original : A Powerpoint presentation on how to write a paper is several steps. It includes some

nice diagrams, tables, and sketches that provide examples of what should be produced during the different steps.

How to write a technical paper (by Andrew A. Chien) – original : Explains how to write a technical paper in 5 steps

Writing a technical paper (by Michael Ernst) – original : These are some more good tips for writing technical papers.

… and here some other related topics

Choosing a venue: conference or journal (by Michael Ernst) – original

Making a technical poster (by Michael Ernst) – original

Reviewing a technical paper (with several links) – original

