


Computer Science &gt; Information Retrieval

arXiv:2201.05176 (cs)

[Submitted on 13 Jan 2022]

Neural Approaches to Conversational Information Retrieval

Jianfeng Gao, Chenyan Xiong, Paul Bennett, Nick Craswell

A conversational information retrieval (CIR) system is an information retrieval (IR) system with a conversational interface which allows users to

interact with the system to seek information via multi-turn conversations of natural language, in spoken or written form. Recent progress in

deep learning has brought tremendous improvements in natural language processing (NLP) and conversational AI, leading to a plethora of

commercial conversational services that allow naturally spoken and typed interaction, increasing the need for more human-centric interactions

in IR. As a result, we have witnessed a resurgent interest in developing modern CIR systems in both research communities and industry. This

book surveys recent advances in CIR, focusing on neural approaches that have been developed in the last few years. This book is based on

the authors' tutorial at SIGIR'2020 (Gao et al., 2020b), with IR and NLP communities as the primary target audience. However, audiences with

other background, such as machine learning and human-computer interaction, will also find it an accessible introduction to CIR. We hope that

this book will prove a valuable resource for students, researchers, and software developers. This manuscript is a working draft. Comments

are welcome.

Comments: Book Draft

Subjects:

Information Retrieval (cs.IR); Computation and Language (cs.CL)

Cite as:

arXiv:2201.05176 [cs.IR]

 

(or arXiv:2201.05176v1 [cs.IR] for this version)

 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2201.05176 

Submission history

From: Chenyan Xiong [view email] 

[v1] Thu, 13 Jan 2022 19:04:59 UTC (18,858 KB)





NASA ADS



Google Scholar



Semantic Scholar

Download:



PDF 



Other formats



Current browse context: cs.IR



&lt; prev 



next &gt;

 



new

 



recent

 



2201

Change to browse by: cs , cs.CL

References &amp; Citations



1 blog link

 (what is this?)

DBLP - CS Bibliography

listing | bibtex

Jianfeng Gao

Chenyan Xiong

Nick Craswell



Export BibTeX Citation

Bookmark





 





 





 





Bibliographic Tools

Bibliographic and Citation Tools


Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?)

Code, Data, Media

Demos

Related Papers

About arXivLabs

About

Help

 Contact

 Subscribe

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Web Accessibility Assistance

arXiv Operational Status 

Get status notifications via 

email or 

slack

Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)

Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)

scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)

