


Computer Science &gt; Information Retrieval

arXiv:1809.02413 (cs)

[Submitted on 7 Sep 2018]

Challenges for Measuring Usefulness of Interactive IR Systems with Log-based

Approaches

Daniel Hienert, Peter Mutschke

The usefulness evaluation model proposed by Cole et al. in 2009 [2] focuses on the evaluation of interactive IR systems by their support

towards the user's overall goal, sub goals and tasks. This is a more human focus of the IR evaluation process than with classical TREC-

oriented studies and gives a more holistic view on the IR evaluation process. However, yet there is no formal framework how the usefulness

model can be operationalized. Additionally, a lot of information needed for the operationalization is only available in explicit user studies where

for example the overall goal and the tasks are prompted from the users or are predefined. Measuring the usefulness of IR systems outside

the laboratory is a challenging task as most often only log data of user interaction is available. But, an operationalization of the usefulness

model based on interaction data could be applied to diverse systems and evaluation results would be comparable. In this article we discuss

the challenges for measuring the usefulness of IIR systems with log-based approaches.

Comments: Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on System And User Centered Evaluation Approaches in Interactive Information Retrieval at CHIIR 2016

Subjects:

Information Retrieval (cs.IR)

Cite as:

arXiv:1809.02413 [cs.IR]

 

(or arXiv:1809.02413v1 [cs.IR] for this version)

 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1809.02413 

Submission history

From: Daniel Hienert [view email] 

[v1] Fri, 7 Sep 2018 11:39:12 UTC (58 KB)





NASA ADS



Google Scholar



Semantic Scholar

Download:



PDF only

(license)

Current browse context: cs.IR



&lt; prev 



next &gt;

 



new

 



recent

 



1809

Change to browse by: cs

References &amp; Citations

DBLP - CS Bibliography

listing | bibtex

Daniel Hienert

Peter Mutschke



Export BibTeX Citation

Bookmark





 





 





 





Bibliographic Tools

Bibliographic and Citation Tools

Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)


Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?)

Code, Data, Media

Demos

Related Papers

About arXivLabs

About

Help

 Contact

 Subscribe

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Web Accessibility Assistance

arXiv Operational Status 

Get status notifications via 

email or 

slack

Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)

scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)

