


TUTORIALS: 

 Differential Privacy for Information Retrieval by Grace Hui Yang and Sicong Zhang

Information Retrieval (IR) research has extensively utilized personalization to advance its

state-of-the-art. In this process, many IR algorithms and applications require the use of

users’ personal information, contextual information and other sensitive and private

information. However, while IR researchers are making progress, there is always a concern

of how not to violate the users’ privacy. Sometimes, the concern becomes so overwhelming

that the IR research has to be stopped to avoid leaking of users’ privacy. The good news is

that recently increasing attentions have been paid on the joint field of privacy and IR –

privacy-preserving IR. As part of the effort, this tutorial offers an introduction to differential

privacy (DP), one of the most advanced techniques in privacy research, and provides

necessary set of theoretical knowledge for applying privacy techniques in IR. Differential

privacy is a technique that provides strong privacy guarantees for data protection.

Theoretically, it aims to maximize the data utility in statistical datasets while minimizing the

risk of exposing individual data entries to any adversary. Differential privacy has been

applied across of a wide range of applications in database, data mining, and IR. This tutorial

aims to lay a theoretical foundation of DP and how it can be applied to IR.

 Bandit Algorithms in Interactive Information Retrieval by Dorota Glowacka

The multi-armed bandit problem models an agent that simultaneously attempts to acquire

new knowledge (exploration) and optimize his decisions based on existing knowledge

(exploitation). The agent attempts to balance these competing tasks in order to maximize his

total value over the period of time considered. There are many practical applications of the

bandit model, such as clinical trials, adaptive routing or portfolio design. Over the last

decade there has been an increased interest in the development of new bandit algorithms

for specific problems in information, such as diverse document ranking, news

recommendation or ranker evaluation. The aim of this tutorial is to provide an overview of

the various applications of bandit algorithms in information retrieval as well as issues

related to their practical deployment and performance in real-life systems/applications. 

 Efficiency/Effectiveness Trade-offs in Learning to Rank by Claudio Lucchese and Franco

Maria Nardini

Tutorial on the effciency/effectiveness tradeoffs in Learning to Rank. In the last years,

learning to rank (LtR) had a significant influence on several tasks in the Information Retrieval

field, with large research efforts coming both from the academia and the industry. Indeed,

efficiency requirements must be fulfilled in order to make an effective research product

deployable within an industrial environment. The evaluation of a model can be too expensive

due to its size, the features used and several other factors. This tutorial discusses the recent

solutions that allow to build an effective ranking model that satisfies temporal budget






HOME

IMPORTANT DATES

CALLS

CONFERENCE SCHEDULE

ATTENDING

ORGANIZERS

SPONSORS &amp; SUPPORTERS



constrains at evaluation time. For more information please visit the tutorial website.

 

 

 

