
15 Steps to Good Research

1. Define and articulate a research question (formulate a research hypothesis).

How to Write a Thesis Statement (Indiana University)

2. Identify possible sources of information in many types and formats.

Georgetown University Library's Research &amp; Course Guides

3. Judge the scope of the project.

4. Reevaluate the research question based on the nature and extent of information available and the parameters of the

research project.

5. Select the most appropriate investigative methods (surveys, interviews, experiments) and research tools (periodical

indexes, databases, websites).

6. Plan the research project.

Writing Anxiety (UNC-Chapel Hill) Strategies for Academic Writing (SUNY Empire State College)

7. Retrieve information using a variety of methods (draw on a repertoire of skills).

8. Refine the search strategy as necessary.

9. Write and organize useful notes and keep track of sources.

Taking Notes from Research Reading (University of Toronto)

Use a citation manager: Zotero or Refworks

10. Evaluate sources using appropriate criteria.

Evaluating Internet Sources

11. Synthesize, analyze and integrate information sources and prior knowledge.

Georgetown University Writing Center

12. Revise hypothesis as necessary.

13. Use information effectively for a specific purpose.

14. Understand such issues as plagiarism, ownership of information (implications of copyright to some extent), and costs of

information.

Georgetown University Honor Council

Copyright Basics (Purdue University)

How to Recognize Plagiarism: Tutorials and Tests from Indiana University

15. Cite properly and give credit for sources of ideas.



Your Account

Effective January 3, 2023, Lauinger Library is open only to Georgetown faculty, students, and staff, and visitors from

Washington Research Library Consortium institutions. WRLC visitors must follow University visitor guidelines and

vaccination requirements.



 




MLA Bibliographic Form (7th edition, 2009)

MLA Bibliographic Form (8th edition, 2016)

Turabian Bibliographic Form: Footnote/Endnote

Turabian Bibliographic Form: Parenthetical Reference

Use a citation manager: Zotero or Refworks

Adapted from the Association of Colleges and Research Libraries "Objectives for Information Literacy Instruction", which are

more complete and include outcomes. See also the broader "Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher

Education."

Contact Us

Directory

Visit

Maps

Services

Research

Collections

Spaces

About

Facebook

Twitter

Instagram

YouTube


Georgetown University Library

37th &amp; O Streets, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20057-1174

202-687-7607

Privacy Policy

Copyright

Web Accessibility

Notice of Non-Discrimination

