
Home &gt; Technical support

WhatIs.com

DEFINITION

operations research (OR)

Sarah Lewis

Operations research (OR) is an analytical method of problem-solving and decision-making that is useful in the management of

organizations. In operations research, problems are broken down into basic components and then solved in defined steps by

mathematical analysis.

The process of operations research can be broadly broken down into the following steps:

1. Identifying a problem that needs to be solved.

2. Constructing a model around the problem that resembles the real world and variables.

3. Using the model to derive solutions to the problem.

4. Testing each solution on the model and analyzing its success.

5. Implementing the solution to the actual problem.

Disciplines that are similar to, or overlap with, operations research include statistical analysis, management science, game

theory, optimization theory, artificial intelligence and network analysis. All of these techniques have the goal of solving complex

problems and improving quantitative decisions.

The concept of operations research arose during World War II by military planners. After the war, the techniques used in their

operations research were applied to addressing problems in business, the government and society.

There are three primary characteristics of all operations research efforts:

1. Optimization- The purpose of operations research is to achieve the best performance under the given circumstances.

Optimization also involves comparing and narrowing down potential options.

2. Simulation- This involves building models or replications in order to try out and test solutions before applying them.

3. Probability and statistics- This includes using mathematical algorithms and data to uncover helpful insights and risks,

make reliable predictions and test possible solutions.

The field of operations research provides a more powerful approach to decision making than ordinary software and data

analytics tools. Employing operations research professionals can help companies achieve more complete datasets, consider

all available options, predict all possible outcomes and estimate risk. Additionally, operations research can be tailored to

specific business processes or use cases to determine which techniques are most appropriate to solve the problem.

Operations research can be applied to a variety of use cases, including:

Scheduling and time management.

Urban and agricultural planning.

Enterprise resource planning (ERP) and supply chain management (SCM).

Inventory management.

Network optimization and engineering.

Packet routing optimization.

Characteristics of operations research

Importance of operations research

Uses of operations research


Latest TechTarget resources

Networking

Security

CIO

HR Software

Customer Experience

Networking

 fax

A fax -- short for 'facsimile' and sometimes called 'telecopying' -- is the telephonic transmission of scanned-in printed ...

 Clos network

A Clos network is a type of nonblocking, multistage switching network used today in large-scale data center switching fabrics.

 collision in networking

In a half-duplex Ethernet network, a collision is the result of two devices on the same Ethernet network attempting to transmit ...

Security

 cloaking

Cloaking is a technique where a different version of web content is returned to users than to the search engine crawlers.

 TrickBot malware

TrickBot is sophisticated modular malware that started as a banking Trojan but has evolved to support many different types of ...

 Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS)

Risk management.

This was last updated in September 2019

Related Terms

qubit (short for quantum bit)

A qubit (short for quantum bit) is the basic unit of information in quantum computing and counterpart to the bit (binary digit) ... See complete definition

Turing Test

A Turing Test is a method of inquiry in artificial intelligence (AI) for determining whether or not a computer is capable of ... See complete definition

What is patch management? Lifecycle, benefits and best practices

Patch management is the subset of systems management that involves identifying, acquiring, testing and installing patches, or ...

See complete definition

Continue Reading About operations research (OR)

The big picture of Operations Research

∙


The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) is a public framework for rating the severity of security vulnerabilities in ...

CIO

 qualitative data

Qualitative data is information that cannot be counted, measured or easily expressed using numbers.

 green IT (green information technology)

Green IT (green information technology) is the practice of creating and using environmentally sustainable computing resources.

 Agile Manifesto

The Agile Manifesto is a document that identifies four key values and 12 principles that its authors believe software developers ...

HRSoftware

 candidate experience

Candidate experience reflects a person's feelings about going through a company's job application process.

 continuous performance management

Continuous performance management, in a human resource (HR) management context, is the supervision of an employee's performance

...

 employee engagement

Employee engagement is the emotional and professional connection an employee feels toward their organization, colleagues and work.

Customer Experience

 voice recognition (speaker recognition)

Voice or speaker recognition is the ability of a machine or program to receive and interpret dictation or to understand and ...

 Salesforce Service Cloud

Salesforce Service Cloud is a customer relationship management (CRM) platform for Salesforce clients to provide service and ...

 BANT

BANT is an acronym that stands for 'Budget, Authority, Need, Timing.'

Browse by Topic

Browse Resources

About Us

Meet The Editors

Editorial Ethics Policy

Contact Us

Advertisers

Business Partners

Events

Media Kit

Corporate Site

Reprints

All Rights Reserved, Copyright 1999 - 2023, TechTarget

Privacy Policy 

Cookie Preferences 

Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information

Close

